As  Karl  Rossm^nn,  a  poor  boy  of  sixteen  who  had  been 
packed  off  to  America  by  his  parents  because  a  servant  girl 
had  seduced  him  and  got  herself  with  child  by  him,  stood  on 
the  liner  slowly  entering  the  harbour  of  New  York,  a  sudden 
burst  of  sunshine  seemed  to  illumine  the  Statue  of  Liberty, 
so  that  he  saw  it  in  a  new  light,  although  he  had  sighted  it 
long  before.  The  arm  with  the  sword  rose  up  as  if  newly 
stretched  aloft,  and  round  the  figure  blew  the  free  winds  of 
heayen. 

‘So  high  F  he  said  to  himself,  and  was  gradually  edged  to 
the  very  rail  by  the  swelling  throng  of  porters  pushing  past 
him,  since  he  was  not  thinking  at  all  of  getting  off  the  ship. 

A  young  man  with  whom  he  had  struck  up  a  slight 
acquaintance  on  the  voyage  called  out  in  passing :  ‘Not  very 
anxious  to. go  ashore,  are  you?’  ‘Oh,  Fm  quite  ready/  said 
Karl  with  a  laugh,  and  being  both  strong  and  in  high  spirits 
he  heaved  his  box  on  to  his  shoulder.  But  as  his  eye  followed 
his  acquaintance,  who  was  already  moving  on  among  the 
others,  lightly  swinging  a  walking-stick,  he  realized  with  dis¬ 
may  that  he  had  forgotten  his  umbrella  down  below.  He  hast- 
ily  begged  his  acquaintance,  who  did  not  seem  particularly 
gratified,  to  oblige  him  by  waiting  beside  the  box  for  a 
minute,* took  another  survey  of  the  situation  to  get  his  bear¬ 
ings  for  the  return  journey,  and  harried  away.  Below  decks 
he  found  to  his  disappointment  that  a  gangway  which  made 
a  handy  short-cut  had  been  barred  for  the  first  time  in  his 
experience,  probably  in  connexion  with  the  disembarkation 
of  so  many  passengers,  and  he  had  painfully  to  find  his  way 

13 


down  endlessly  recurring  stairs,  through  corridors  with 
countless  turnings,  through  an  empty  room  with  a  deserted 
writing-table,  until  in  the  end,  since  he  had  taken  this  route 
no  more  than  once  or  twice  and  always  among  a  crowd  of 
other  people,  he  lost  himself  completely.  In  his  bewilderment, 
meeting  no  one  and  hearing  nothing  but  the  ceaseless 
shuffling  of  thousands  of  feet  above  him,  and  in  the  distance, 
like  faint  breathing,  the  last  throbbings  of  the  engines,  which 
had  already  been  shut  off,  he  began  unthinkingly  to  hammer 
on  a  little  door  by  which  he  had  chanced  to  stop  in  his 
wanderings. 

It  isn't  locked/  a  voice  shouted  from  inside,  and  Karl 
opened  the  door  with  genuine  relief.  ‘What  are  you  hammer¬ 
ing  at  the  door  for,  like  a  madman?'  asked  a  huge  man, 
scarcely  even  glancing  at  Karl.  Through  an  opening  of  some 
kind  a  feeble  glimmer  of  daylight,  all  that  was  left  after  the 
top  decks  had  used  it  up,  fell  into  the  wretched  cubby-hole  in 
which  a  bunk,  a  cupboard,  a  chair  and  the  man  were  packed 
together,  as  if  they  had  been  stored  there.  Tve  lost  my  way/ 
said  Karl.  ‘I  never  noticed  it  during  the  voyage,  but  this  is  a 
terribly  big  ship/  ‘Yes,  you’re  right  there/  said  the  man  with 
a  certain  pride,  fiddling  all  the  time  with  the  lock  of  a  little 
sea-chest,  which  he  kept  pressing  with  both  hands  in  the 
hope  of  hearing  the  wards  snap  home.  ‘But  come  inside/  he 
went  on,  ‘you  don’t  want  to  stand  out  there !  ’  ‘I’m  not  dis¬ 
turbing  you?’  asked  Karl.  ‘Why,  how  should  you  disturb 
me?’  ‘Are  you  a  German?’  Karl  asked  to  reassure  himself 
further,  for  he  had  heard  a  great  deal  about  the  perils  which 
threatened  newcomers  to  America,  particularly  from  the 
Irish.  ‘That’s  what  I  am,  yes/  said  the  man.  Karl  still  hesi¬ 
tated.  Then  the  man  suddenly  seized  the  door  handle  and 
pulling  the  door  shut  with  a  hasty  movement  swept  Karl 
into  the  cabin. 

‘I  can’t  stand  being  stared  at  from  the  passage/  he  said, 
beginning  to  fiddle  with  his  chest  again,  ‘people  keep  passing 
and  staring  in,  it’s  more  than  a  man  can  bear.’  ‘But  the 

14 


passage  is  quite  empty/  said  Karl,  who  was  standing  squeezed 
uncomfortably  against  the  end  of  the  bunk.  ‘Yes,  now/  said 
the  man.  ‘But  it’s  now  we  were  speaking  about/  thought 
Karl,  ‘it’s  hard  work  talking  to  this  man/  ‘Lie  down  on  the 
bunk,  you’ll  have  more  room  there/  said  the  man.  Karl 
scrambled  in  as  well  as  he  could,  and  laughed  aloud  at  his 
first  unsuccessful  attempt  to  swing  himself  over.  But  scarcely 
was  he  in  the  bunk  when  he  cried:  ‘Good  Lord,  I’ve  quite 
forgotten  my  box !’  ‘Why,  where  is  it?’  ‘Up  on  deck,  a  man 
I  know  is  looking  after  it.  What’s  his  name  again?’  And  he 
fished  a  visiting-card  from  a  pocket  which  his  mother  had 
made  in  the  lining  of  his  coat  for  the  voyage.  ‘Butterbaum, 
Franz  Butterbaum.’  ‘Can’t  you  do  without  your  box?’  ‘Of 
course  not.’  ‘Well,  then,  why  did  you  leave  it  in  a  stranger’s 
hands?’  'I  forgot  my  umbrella  down  below  and  rushed  off  to 
get  it;  I  didn’t  want  to  drag  my  box  with  me.  Then  on  top 
of  that  I  got  lost.’  ‘You’re  all  alone?  Without  anyone  to  look 
after  you?’  ‘Yes,  all  alone.’  ‘Perhaps  I  should  join  up  with 
this  man/  the  thought  came  into  Karl’s  head,  ‘where  am  I 
likely  to  find  a  better  friend?’  ‘And  now  you’ve  lost  the  box 
as  well.  Not  to  mention  the  umbrella/  And  the  man  sat  down 
on  the  chair  as  if  Karl’s  business  had  at  last  acquired  some 
interest  for  him.  ‘But  I  think  my  box  can’t  be  lost  yet.’  ‘You 
can  think  *what  you  like,’  said  the  man,  vigorously  scratching 
his  dark,  short,  thick  hair.  ‘But  morals  change  every  time  you 
come  to  a  new  port.  In  Hamburg  your  Butterbaum  might 
maybe  have  looked  after  your  box;  while 'here  it’s  most  likely 
that  they’ye  both  disappeared.’  ‘But  then  I  must  go  up  and 
see  about  it  at  once,’  said  Karl,  looking  round  for  the  way 
out.  ‘You  just  stay  where  you  are/  said  the  man,  giving  him 
a  push  with  one  hand  on  the  chest,  quite  roughly,  so  that  he 
fell  bade  on  the  bunk  again.  ‘But  why?’  asked  Karl  in  exas¬ 
peration.  ‘Because  there’s  no  pointMn  it/  said  the  man,  ‘I’m 
leaving  too  very  soon,  and  we  can  go  together.  Either  the 
box  is  stolen  and  then  there’s  no  help  for  it,  or  the  man  has 
left  it  standing  where  it  was,  and  then  we’ll  find  it  all  the 


15 


more  easily  when  the  ship  is  empty.  And  the  same  with  your 
umbrella.'  ‘Do  you  know  your  way  about  the  ship?’  asked 
Karl  suspiciously,  and  it  seemed  to  him  that  the  idea,  other¬ 
wise  plausible,  that  his  things  would  be  easier  to  find  when 
the  ship  was  empty  must  have  a  catch  in  it  somewhere. 
‘Why,  I’m  a  stoker,’  said  the  man.  ‘You’re  a  stoker  1'  cried 
Karl  delightedly,  as  if  this  surpassed  all  his  expectations,  and 
he  rose  up  on  his  elbow  to  look  at  the  man  more  closely.  ‘Just 
outside  the  room  where  I  slept  with  the  Slovaks  there  was  a 
little  window  through  which  we  could  see  into  the  engine- 
room.'  ‘Yes,  that’s  where  I’ve  been  working,’  said  the  stoker. 
‘I  have  always  had  a  passion  for  machinery,’  said  Karl,  follow¬ 
ing  his  own  train  of  thought,  ‘and  I  would  have  become  an 
engineer  in  time,  that’s  certain,  if  I  hadn’t  had  to  go  to 
America.’  ‘Why  did  you  have  to  go?’  ‘Oh,  that !’  said  Karl, 
dismissing  the  whole  business  with  a  wave  of  the  hand.  He 
looked  with  a  smile  at  the  stoker,  as  if  begging  his  indulgence 
for  not  telling.  ‘There  was  some  reason  for  it,  I  suppose,’  said 
the  stoker,  and  it  was  hard  to  tell  whether  in  saying  that  he 
wanted  to  encourage  or  discourage  Karl  to  tell.  ‘I  could  be  a 
stoker  now  too,’  said  Karl,  ‘it’s  all  one  now  to  my  father 
and  mother  what  becomes  of  me.’  ‘My  job’s  going  to  be  free,’ 
said  the  stoker,  and  to  point  his  full  consciousness  of  it,  he 
stuck  his  hands  into  his  trouser  pockets  and  flung  his  legs 
in  their  baggy,  leather-like  trousers  on  the  bunk  to  stretch 
them.  Karl  had  to  shift  nearer  to  the  wall.  ‘Are  you  leaving 
the  ship?’  ‘Yes,  we’re  paid  off  today.’  ‘But  why?  Don’t  you 
like  it?’  ‘Oh,  that’s  the  way  things  are  run;  it  doesn’t  always 
depend  on  whether  a  man  likes  it  or  not.  But  you’re  quite 
right,  I  don’t  like  it.  I  don’t  suppose  you’re  thinking  seriously 
of  being  a  stoker,  but  that’s  just  the  time  when  you’re  most 
likely  to  turn  into  one.  So  I  advise  you  strongly  against  it.  If 
you  wanted  to  study  engineering  in  Europe,  why  shouldn’t 
you  study  it  here?  The  American  universities  are  ever  so 
much  better  than  the  European  ones.’  ‘That’s  possible,’  said 
Karl,  ‘but  I  have  hardly  any  money  to  study  on.  I’ve  read  of 

16 


someone  who  worked  all  day  in  a  shop  and  studied  at  night 
until  he  became  a  doctor,  and  a  mayor,  too,  I  think,  but  that 
needs  a  lot  of  perseverance,  doesn't  it?  I'm  afraid  I  haven't 
got  that.  Besides,  I  wasn't  a  particularly  good  scholar;  it  was 
no  great  wrench  for  me  to  leave  school.  And  maybe  the 
schools  here  are  more  difficult.  I  can  hardly  speak  any  English 
at  all.  Anyhow,  people  here  have  a  prejudice  against 
foreigners,  I  think.'  ‘So  you’ve  come  up  against  that  kind  of 
thing  too,  have  you?  Well,  that's  all  to  the  good.  You're  the 
man  for  me.  See  here,  this  is  a  German  ship  we’re  on,  it 
belongs  to  the  Hamburg- American  Line;  so  why  aren’t  the 
crew  all  Germans,  I  ask  you?  Why  is  the  Chief  Engineer  a 
Roumanian?  A  man  called  Schubal.  It's  hard  to  believe  it.  A 
measly  hound  like  that  slave-driving  us  Germans  on  a  Ger¬ 
man  ship !  You  mustn’t  think'  -  here  his  voice  failed  him 
and  he  gesticulated  with  his  hands  -  ‘that  I’m  complaining 
for  the  sake  of  complaining.  I  know  you  have  no  influence 
and  that  you’re  a  poor  lad  yourself.  But  it's  too  much !’  And 
he  brought  his  fist  several  times  down  on  the  table,  never 
taking  his  eyes  from  it  while  he  flourished  it.  ‘I’ve  signed  on 
in  ever  so  many  ships'  -  and  he  reeled  off  twenty  names  one 
after  the  other  as  if  they  were  one  word,  which  quite  con¬ 
fused  Karl  -  ‘and  I've  done  good  work  in  all  of  them,  been 
praised,  pleased  every  captain  I  ever  had,  actually  stuck  to 
the  same  cargo  boat  for  several  years,  I  did’  -  he  rose  to  his  feet 
as  if  that  had  been  the  greatest  achievement  of  his  life  -  ‘and 
here  on  this  tub,  where  everything’s  done  by  rule  and  you 
don’t  need  any  wits  at  all,  here  I’m  no  good,  here  I’m  just  in 
Schubal’s  way,  here  I’m  a  slacker  who  should  be  kicked  out 
and  doesn't  begin  to  earn  his  pay.  Can  you  understand  that? 
I  can’t.'  ‘Don’t  you  put  up  with  it !'  said  Karl  excitedly.  He 
had  almost  lost  the  feeling  that  he  was  on  the  uncertain 
boards  of  a  ship,  beside  the  coast  of  an  unknown  continent, 
so  much  at  home  did  he  feel  here  in  the  stoker’s  bunk.  ‘Have 
you  seen  the  Captain  about  it?  Have  you  asked  him  to  give 
you  your  rights?’  ‘Oh,  get  away  with  you,  out  you  get,  I 

17 


don’t  want  you  here.  You  don’t  listen  to  what  I  say,  and 
then  you  give  me  advice.  How  could  I  go  to  the  Captain?’ 
Wearily  the  stoker  sat  down  again  and  hid  his  face  in  his 
hands. 

‘I  can’t  give  him  any  better  advice/  Karl  told  himself. 
And  it  occurred  to  him  that  he  would  have  done  better  to  go 
and  get  his  box  instead  of  handing  out  advice  that  was  merely 
regarded  as  stupid.  When  his  father  had  given  him  the  box 
for  good  he  had  said  in  jest:  ‘How  long  will  you  keep  it?’ 
and  now  that  faithful  box  had  perhaps  been  lost  in  earnest. 
His  sole  remaining  consolation  was  that  his  father  could 
hardly  learn  of  his  present  situation,  even  if  he  were  to 
inquire.  All  that  the  shipping  company  could  say  was  that 
he  had  safely  reached  New  York.  But  Karl  felt  sorry  to  think 
that  he  had  hardly  used  the  things  in  the  box  yet,  although, 
to  take  an  instance,  he  should  long  since  have  changed  his 
shirt.  So  his  economies  had  started  at  the  wrong  point,  it 
seemed;  now,  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  career,  when  it 
was  essential  to  show  himself  in  clean  clothes,  he  would  have 
to  appear  in  a  dirty  shirt.  Otherwise  the  loss  of  the  box 
would  not  have  been  so  serious,  for  the  suit  which  he  was 
wearing  was  actually  better  than  the  one  in  the  box,  which 
in  reality  was  merely  an  emergency  suit  that  his  mother  had 
hastily  mended  just  before  he  left.  Then  he  remembered  that 
in  the  box  there  was  a  piece  of  Veronese  salami  which  his 
mother  had  packed  as  an  extra  tit-bit,  only  he  had  not  been 
able  to  eat  more  than  a  scrap  of  it,  for  during  the  voyage  he 
had  been  quite  without  any  appetite,  and  the  soup  which  was 
served  in  the  steerage  had  been  more  than  sufficient  for  him. 
But  now  he  would  have  liked  to  have  the  salami  at  hand,  so 
as  to  present  it  to  the  stoker.  For  such  people  were  easily 
won  over  by  the  gift  of  some  trifle  or  other;  Karl  had  learned 
that  from  his  father,  who  deposited  cigars  in  the  pockets  of 
the  subordinate  officials  with  whom  he  did  business,  and  so 
won  them  over.  Yet  all  that  Karl  now  possessed  in  the  way 
of  gifts  was  his  money,  and  he  did  not  want  to  touch  that 

18 


for  the  time  being,  in  case  he  should  have  lost  his  box.  Again 
his  thoughts  turned  back  to  the  box,  and  he  simply  could  not 
understand  why  he  should  have  watched  it  during  the 
voyage  so  vigilantly  that  he  had  almost  lost  his  sleep  over  it, 
only  to  let  that  same  box  be  filched  from  him  so  easily  now. 
He  remembered  the  five  nights  during  which  he  had  kept  a 
suspicious  eye  on  a  little  Slovak  whose  bunk  was  two  places 
away  from  him  on  the  left,  and  who  had  designs,  he  was 
sure,  on  the  box.  This  Slovak  was  merely  waiting  for  Karl  to 
be  overcome  by  sleep  and  doze  off  for  a  minute,  so  that  he 
might  manoeuvre  the  box  away  with  a  long,  pointed  stick 
which  he  was  always  playing  or  practising  with  during  the 
day.  By  day  the  Slovak  looked  innocent  enough,  but  hardly 
did  night  come  on  than  he  kept  rising  up  from  his  bunk  to 
cast  melancholy  glances,  at  Karl’s  box.  Karl  had  seen  this 
quite  clearly,  for  every  now  and  then  someone  would  light  a 
little  candle,  although  it  was  forbidden  by  the  ship’s  regula¬ 
tions,  and  with  the  anxiety  of  the  emigrant  would  peer  into 
some  incomprehensible  prospectus  of  an  emigration  agency. 
If  one  of  these  candles  was  burning  near  him,  Karl  could 
doze  off  for  a  little,  but  if  it  was  farther  away  or  if  the  place 
was  quite  dark,  he  had  to  keep  his  eyes  open.  The  strain  of 
this  task  had  quite  exhausted  him,  and  now  perhaps  it  had 
all  been  in  vain.  Oh,  that  Butterbaum,  if  ever  he  met  him 
again ! 

At  that  moment,  in  the  distance,  the  unbroken  silence  was 
disturbed  by  a  series  of  small,  short  taps)  like  the  tapping  of 
children’s  feet;  they  came  nearer,  growing  louder,  until  they 
sounded  like  the  tread  of  quietly  marching  men.  Men  in 
single  file,  as  was  natural  in  the  narrow  passage,  and  a 
clashing  as  of  arms  could  be  heard.  Karl,  who  had  been  on  the 
point  of  relaxing  himself  in  a  sleep  free  of  all  worries  about 
boxes  and  Slovaks,  started  up  and  nudged  the  stoker  to  draw 
his  attention,  for  the  head  of  the  procession  seemed  just  to 
have  reached  the  door.  ‘That’s  the  ship’s  band,’  said  the  stoker, 
‘they’ve  been  playing  up  above  and  have  come  back  to  pack 

'  *9 


up.  All’s  clear  now,  and  we  can  go.  Come V  He  took  Karl  by 
the  hand,  snatched  at  the  last  moment  a  framed  picture  of 
the  Madonna  from  the  wall  above  the  bed,  stuck  it  into  his 
breast  pocket,  seized  his  chest,  and  with  Karl  hastily  left  the 
cubby-hole. 

Tm  going  to  the  office  now  to  give  them  a  piece  of  my 
mind.  All  the  passengers  are  gone;  I  don’t  need  to  care  what 
I  do.’  The  stoker  kept  repeating  this  theme  with  variations, 
and  as  he  walked  on  kicked  out  his  foot  sideways  at  a  rat 
which  crossed  his  way,  but  merely  drove  it  more  quickly  into 
its  hole,  which  it  reached  just  in  time.  He  was  slow  in  all  his 
movements,  for  though  his  legs  were  long  they  were  mas¬ 
sive  as  well. 

They  went  through  part  of  the  kitchen,  where  some  girls 
in  dirty  white  aprons  -  which  they  splashed  deliberately  - 
were  washing  dishes  in  great  tubs.  The  stoker  hailed  a  girl 
called  Lina,  put  his  arm  round  her  waist,  and  since  she 
coquettishly  resisted  the  embrace  dragged  her  a  part  of  the 
way  with  him.  ‘It’s  pay-day;  aren’t  you  coming  along?’  he 
asked.  ‘Why  take  the  trouble;  you  can  bring  me  the  money 
here,’  she  replied,  squirming  under  his  arm  and  running 
away.  ‘Where  did  you  pick  up  that  good-looking  boy?’  she 
cried  after  him,  but  without  waiting  for  an  answer.  They 
could  hear  the  laughter  of  the  other  girls,  who  had  all  stopped 
their  work. 

But  they  went  on  and  came  to  a  door  above  which  there 
was  a  little  pediment,  supported  by  tiny,  gilded  caryatides. 
For  a  ship’s  fitting  it  looked  extravagantly  sumptuous.  Karl 
realized  that  he  had  never  been  in  this  part  of  the  ship,  which 
during  the  voyage  had  probably  been  reserved  for  passengers 
of  the  first  and  second  class;  but  the  doors  that  cut  it  off  had 
now  been  thrown  open  to  prepare  for  the  cleaning  down  of 
the  ship.  Indeed,  they  had  already  met  some  men  with 
brooms  on  their  shoulders,  who  had  greeted  the  stoker.  Karl 
was  amazed  at  the  extent  of  the  ship’s  organization;  as  a 
steerage  passenger  he  had  seen  very  little  of  it.  Along  the 


20 


corridors  ran  wires  of  electric  installations,  and  a  little  bell 
kept  sounding  every  now  and  then. 

The  stoker  knocked  respectfully  at  the  door,  and  when 
someone  cried  ‘Come  in!’  urged  Karl  with  a  wave  of  the 
hand  to  enter  boldly.  Karl  stepped  in,  but  remained  stand¬ 
ing  beside  the  door.  The  three  windows  of  this  room  framed 
a  view  of  the  sea,  and  gazing  at  the  cheerful  motion  of  the 
waves  his  heart  beat  faster,  as  if  he  had  not  been  looking  at 
the  sea  without  interruption  for  five  long  days.  Great  ships 
crossed  each  other’s  courses  in  either  direction,  yielding  to 
the  assault  of  the  waves  oniy  as  far  as  their  ponderous  weight 
permitted  them.  If  one  almost  shut  one’s  eyes,  these  ships 
seemed  to  be  staggering  under  their  own  weight.  From  their 
masts  flew  long,  narrow  pennants  which,  though  kept  taut 
by  the  speed  of  their  going,  at  the  same  time  fluttered  a  little. 
Probably  from  some  battleship  there  could  be  heard  salvoes, 
fired  in  salute,  and  a  warship  of  some  kind  passed  at  no  great 
distance;  the  muzzles  of  its  guns,  gleaming  with  the  reflec¬ 
tion  of  sunlight  on  steel,  seemed  to  be  nursed  along  by  the 
sure,  smooth  motion,  although  not  on  an  even  keel.  Only  a 
distant  view  of  the  smaller  ships  and  boats  could  be  had,  at 
least  from  the  door,  as  they  darted  about  in  swarms  through  the 
gaps  between  the  great  ships.  And  behind  them  all  rose  New 
York,  and  its  skyscrapers  stared  at  Karl  with  their  hundred 
thousand  eyes.  Yes,  in  this  room  one  realized  where  one  was. 

At  a  round  table  three  gentlemen  were  sitting,  one  a  ship’s 
officer  in  the  blue  ship’s  uniform,  the  two  others  harbour 
officials  in  black  American  uniforms.  On  the  table  lay  piles 
of  various  papers,  which  the  officer  first  glanced  over,  pen  in 
hand,  and  then  handed  to  the  two  others,  who  read  them, 
made  excerpts,  and  filed  them  away  in  portfolios,  except 
when 'they  were  not  actually  engaged  in  taking  down  some 
kind  of  protocol  which  one  of  them  dictated  to  his  colleagues, 
making  clicking  noises  with  his  teeth  all  the  time. 

By  the  first  window  a  little  man  was  sitting  at  a  desk  with 
his  back  to  the  door;  he  was  busy  with  some  huge  ledgers 


21 


ranked  on  a  stout  book-shelf  on  a  level  with  his  head.  Beside 
him  stood  an  open  safe  which,  at  first  glance  at  least,  seemed 
empty. 

The  second  window  was  vacant  and  gave  the  better  view. 
But  near  the  third  two  gentlemen  were  standing  conversing 
in  low  tones.  One  of  them  was  leaning  against  the  window; 
he  was  wearing  the  ship's  uniform  and  playing  with  the  hilt 
of  his  sword.  The  man  to  whom  he  was  speaking  faced  the 
window,  and  now  and  then  a  movement  of  his  disclosed  part 
of  a  row  of  decorations  on  the  breast  of  his  interlocutor.  He 
was  in  civilian  clothes  and  carried  a  thin  bamboo  cane  which, 
as  both  his  hands  were  resting  on  his  hips,  also  stood  out  like 
a  sword. 

Karl  did  not  have  much  time  to  see  all  this,  for  almost  at 
once  an  attendant  came  up  to  them  and  asked  the  stoker, 
with  a  glance  which  seemed  to  indicate  that  he  had  no  busi¬ 
ness  here,  what  he  wanted.  The  stoker  replied  as  softly  as  he 
had  been  asked  that  he  wished  to  speak  to  the  Head  Purser. 
The  attendant  made  a  gesture  of  refusal  with  his  hand,  but 
all  the  same  tiptoed  towards  the  man  with  the  ledgers,  avoid¬ 
ing  the  round  table  by  a  wide  detour.  The  ledger  official  - 
this  could  clearly  be  seen  -  stiffened  all  over  at  the  words  of 
the  attendant,  but  at  last  turned  round  towards  this  man 
who  wished  to  speak  to  him  and  waved  him  away  violently, 
repudiating  the  attendant  too,  to  make  quite  certain.  The 
attendant  then  sidled  back  to  the  stoker  and  said  in  the  voice 
of  one  imparting  a  confidence :  ‘Clear  out  of  here  at  once  !  ’ 

At  this  reply  the  stoker  turned  his  eyes  on  Karl,  as  if  Karl 
were  his  heart,  to  whom  he  was  silently  bewailing  his  grief. 
Without  stopping  to  think,  Karl  launched  himself  straight 
across  the  room,  actually  brushing  against  one  of  the  officers' 
chairs,  while  the  attendant  chased  after  him,  swooping  with 
widespread  arms  as  if  to  catch  an  insect;  but  Karl  was  the 
first  to  reach  the  Head  Purser's  desk;  which  he  gripped  firmly 
in  case  the  attendant  should  try  to  drag  him  away. 

The  whole  room  naturally  sprang  to  life  at  once.  The  ship's 


22 


officer  at  the  table  leapt  to  his  feet;  the  harbour  officials 
looked  on  calmly  but  attentively;  the  two  gentlemen  by  the 
window  moved  closer  to  each  other;  the  attendant,  who 
thought  it  was  no  longer  his  place  to  interfere,  since  his 
masters  were  now  involved,  stepped  back.  The  stoker  waited 
tensely  by  the  door  for  the  moment  when  his  intervention 
should  be  required.  And  the  Head  Purser  at  last  made  a  com¬ 
plete  rightabout  turn  in  his  chair. 

From  his  secret  pocket,  which  he  did  not  mind  showing  to 
these  people,  Karl  hauled  out  his  passport/  which  he  opened 
and  laid  on  the  desk  in  lieu  of  further  introduction.  The  Head 
Purser  seemed  to  consider  the  passport  irrelevant,  for  he 
flicked  it  aside  with  two  fingers,  whereupon  Karl,  as  if  that 
formality  were  satisfactorily  settled,  put  it  back  in  his  pocket 
again.  * 

‘May  I  be  allowed  to  say/  he  then  began,  ‘that  in  my  opin¬ 
ion  an  injustice  has  been  done  to  my  friend  the  stoker? There’s 
a  certain  man  Schubal  aboard  who  bullies  him.  He  has  a 
long  record  of  satisfactory  service  on  many  ships,  whose 
names  he  can  give  you,  he  is  diligent,  takes  an  interest  in  his 
work,  and  it’s  really  hard  to  see  why  on  this  particular  ship, 
where  the  work,  isn’t  so  heavy  as  on  cargo  boats,  for  instance, 
he  should  get  so  little  credit.  It  must  be  sheer  slander  that 
keeps  him  back  and  robs  him  of  the  recognition  that  should 
certainly  be  his.  I  have  confined  myself,  as  you  can  see,  to 
generalities;  he  can  lay  his  specific  complaints  before  you  him¬ 
self.’  In  saying  this  Karl  had  addressed  •  all  the  gentlemen 
present,  because  in  fact  they  were  all  listening  to  him,  and 
because  it  seemed  much  more  likely  that  among  so  many  at 
least  one  just  man  might  be  found,  than  that  the  one  just 
man  should  be  the  Head  Purser.  Karl  also  guilefully  con¬ 
cealed  the  fact  that  he  had  known  the  stoker  for  such  a  short 
time.  But  he  would  have  made  a  rrujch  better  speech  had  he 
not  been  distracted  by  the  red  face  of  the  man  with  the  bam¬ 
boo  cane,  which  was  now  in  his  line  of  vision  for  the  first 
time. 


*3 


‘It's  all  true,  every  word  of  it/  said  the  stoker  before  any¬ 
one  even  asked  him,  indeed  before  anyone  so  much  as  looked 
at  him.  This  over-eagerness  on  his  part  might  have  proved  a 
great  mistake  if  the  man  with  the  decorations  who,  it  now 
dawned  on  Karl,  was  of  course  the  Captain,  had  not  clearly 
made  up  his  mind  to  hear  the  case.  For  he  stretched  out  his 
hand  and  called  to  the  stoker:  ‘Come  here!’  in  a  voice  as 
firm  as  a  rock.  Everything  now  depended  on  the  stoker’s  be¬ 
haviour,  for  about  the  justice  of  his  case  Karl  had  no  doubt 
whatever. 

Luckily  it  appeared  at  this  point  that  the  stoker  was  a 
man  of  some  worldly  experience.  With  exemplary  composure 
he  drew  out  of  his  sea-chest,  at  the  first  attempt,  a  little 
bundle  of  papers  and  a  notebook,  walked  over  with  them  to 
the  Captain  as  if  that  were  a  matter  of  course,  entirely  ignor¬ 
ing  the  Head  Purser,  and  spread  out  his  evidence  on  the 
window-ledge.  There  was  nothing  for  the  Head  Purser  to  do 
but  also  to  come  forward.  ‘The  man  is  a  notorious  grumbler/ 
he  said  in  explanation,  ‘he  spends  more  time  in  the  pay-room 
than  in  the  engine-room.  He  has  driven  Schubal,  who’s  a 
quiet  fellow,  to  absolute  desperation.  Listen  to  me  !’  here  he 
turned  to  the  stoker.  ‘You’re  a  great  deal  too  persistent  in 
pushing  yourself  forward.  How  often  have  you  been  flung 
out  of  the  pay-room  already,  and  serve  you  right  too,  for 
your  impudence  in  demanding  things  to  which  you  have  no 
right  whatever?  How  often  have  you  gone  running  from 
the  pay-room  to  the  Purser’s  office?  How  often  has  it  been 
patiently  explained  to  you  that  Schubal  is  your  immediate 
superior,  and  that  it’s  him  you  have  to  deal  with,  and 
him  alone?  And  now  you  actually  come  here,  when  the 
Captain  himself  is  present,  to  pester  him  with  your  impu¬ 
dence,  and  as  if  that  weren’t  enough  you  bring  a  mouth¬ 
piece  with  you  to  reel  off  the  absurd  grievances  you’ve 
drilled  into  him,  a  boy  I’ve  never  even  seen  on  the  ship 
before  1  ’ 

Karl  forcibly  restrained  himself  from  springing  forward. 


24 


But  the  Captain  had  already  intervened  with  the  remark: 
‘Better  hear  what  the  man  has  to  say  for  himself.  Schubal's 
getting  a  good  deal  too  big  for  his  boots  these  days,  but  that 
doesn't  mean  I  think  you’re  right.'  The  last  words  were 
addressed  to  the  stoker;  it  was  only  natural  that  the  Captain 
should  not  take  his  part  at  once,  yet  everything  seemed  to  be 
going  the  right  way.  The  stoker  began  to  state  his  case  and 
controlled  himself  so  far  at  the  very  beginning  as  to  call 
Schubal  ‘Mr  Schubal'.  Standing  beside  the  Head  Purser’s 
vacant  desk,  Karl  felt  so  pleased  that  in  his  delight  he  kept 
pressing  the  letter-scales  down  with  his  finger.  Mr  Schubal 
was  unfair !  Mr  Schubal  gave  the  preference  to  foreigners  1 
Mr  Schubal  ordered  the  stoker  out  of  the  engine-room  and 
made  him  clean  water-closets,  which  was  not  a  stoker’s  job 
at  all !  At  one  point  even  the  capability  of  Mr  Schubal  was 
called  in  question,  as  being  more  apparent  than  real.  At  this 
point  Karl  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  Captain  and  stared  at  him 
with  earnest  deference,  as  if  they  had  been  colleagues,  to 
keep  him  from  being  influenced  against  the  stoker  by  the 
man’s  awkward  way  of  expressing  himself.  All  the  same, 
nothing  definite  emerged  from  the  stoker’s  outpourings,  and 
although  the  Captain  still  listened  thoughtfully,  his  eyes 
expressing  a  resolution  to  hear  the  stoker  this  time  to  the 
end,  the  other  gentlemen  were  growing  impatient  and  the 
stoker’s 'voice  no  longer  dominated  the  room,  which  was  a 
bad  sign.  The  gentleman  in  civilian  clothes  was  the  first  to 
show  his  impatience  by  bringing  his  bamboo  stick  into  play 
and  tapping,  though  only  softly,  on  the  floor.  The  others 
still  looked  up  now  and  then;  but  the  two  harbour  officials, 
who  were  clearly  pressed  for  time,  snatched  up  their  papers 
again  and  began,  though  somewhat  absently,  to  glance  over 
them;  the  ship’s  officer  turned  to  his  desk,  and  the  Head 
Purser,  who  now  thought  he  had  won  the  day,  heaved  a  loud 
ironical  sigh.  From  the  general  dispeftion  of  interest  the  only 
one  who  seemed  to  be  exempt  was  the  attendant,  who  sym¬ 
pathized  to  some  extent  with  this  poor  man  confronting  the 


great,  and  gravely  nodded  to  Karl  as  though  trying  to  explain 
something. 

Meanwhile,  outside  the  windows,  the  life  of  the  harbour 
went  on;  a  flat  barge  laden  with  a  mountain  of  barrels,  which 
must  have  been  wonderfully  well  packed,  since  they  did  not 
roll  off,  went  past,  almost  completely  obscuring  the  daylight; 
little  motor-boats,  which  Karl  would  have  liked  to  examine 
thoroughly  if  he  had  had  time,  shot  straight  past  in  obed¬ 
ience  to  the  slightest  touch  of  the  man  standing  erect  at  the 
wheel.  Here  and  there  curious  objects  bobbed  independently 
out  of  the  restless  water,  were  immediately  submerged  again 
and  sank  before  his  astonished  eyes;  boats  belonging  to  the 
ocean  liners  were  rowed  past  by  sweating  sailors;  they  were 
filled  with  passengers  sitting  silent  and  expectant  as  if  they 
had  been  stowed  there,  except  that  some  of  them  could  not 
refrain  from  turning  their  heads  to  gaze  at  the  changing 
scene.  A  movement  without  end,  a  restlessness  transmitted 
from  the  restless  element  to  helpless  human  beings  and  their 
works ! 

But  everything  demanded  haste,  clarity,  exact  statement; 
and  what  was  the  stoker  doing?  Certainly  he  was  talking 
himself  into  a  sweat;  his  hands  were  trembling  so  much  that 
he  could  no  longer  hold  the  papers  he  had  laid  on  the  window- 
ledge;  from  all  points  of  the  compass  complaints  about  Schubal 
streamed  into  his  head,  each  of  which,  it  seemed  to  him, 
should  have  been  sufficient  to  dispose  of  Schubal  for  good; 
but  all  he  could  produce  for  the  Captain  was  a  wretched  far¬ 
rago  in  which  everything  was  lumped  together.  For  a  long 
time  the  man  with  the  bamboo  cane  had  been  staring  at  the 
ceiling  and  whistling  to  himself;  the  harbour  officials  now 
detained  the  ship’s  officer  at  their  table  and  showed  no  sign 
of  ever  letting  him  go  again;  the  Head  Purser  was  clearly  re¬ 
strained  from  letting  fly  only  by  the  Captain’s  composure; 
the  attendant  stood  at  attention,  waiting  every  moment  for 
the  Captain  to  give  an  order  concerning  the  stoker. 

At  that  Karl  could  no  longer  remain  inactive.  So  he  ad- 

26 


vanced  slowly  towards  the  group,  running  over  in  his  mind 
the  more  rapidly  all  the  ways  in  which  he  could  most  adroitly 
handle  the  affair.  It  was  certainly  high  time;  a  little  longer, 
and  they  might  quite  well  both  of  them  be  kicked  out  of  the 
office.  The  Captain  might  be  a  good  man  and  might  also, 
or  so  it  seemed  to  Karl,  have  some  particular  reason  at  the 
moment  to  show  that  he  was  a  just  master;  but  after  all  he 
wasn't  a  mere  instrument  to  be  recklessly  played  on,  and 
that  was  exactly  how  the  stoker  was  treating  him  in  the 
boundless  indignation  of  his  heart. 

Accordingly  Karl  said  to  the  stoker :  Tou  must  put  things 
more  simply,  more  clearly;  the  Captain  can't  do  justice  to 
what  you  are  telling  him.  How  can  he  know  all  the  mech¬ 
anics  and  ship’s  boys  by  name,  far  less  by  their  first  names, 
so  that  when  you  mention  So-and-so  he  can  tell  at  once  who 
is  meant?  Take  your  grievances  in  order,  tell  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  ones  first  and  the  lesser  ones  afterwards;  perhaps  you’ll 
find  that  it  won’t  be  necessary  even  to  mention  most  of 
them.  You  always  explained  them  clearly  enough  to  me !’  If 
boxes  could  be  stolen  in  America,  one  could  surely  tell  a  he 
now  and  then  as  well,  he  thought  in  self -excuse. 

But  was  his  advice  of  any  use?  Might  it  not  already  be  too 
late?  The  stoker  certainly  stopped  speaking  at  once  when  he 
heard  the  familiar  voice,  but  his  eyes  were  so  blinded  with 
tears  of  wounded  dignity,  of  dreadful  memory,  of  extreme 
present  grief,  that  he  could  hardly  even  recognize  Karl.  How 
could  he  at  this  stage  -  Karl  silently  realized  this,  facing  the 
now  silent  stoker  -  how  could  he  at  this  stage  suddenly 
change  his  style  of  argument,  when  it  seemed  plain  to  him 
that  he  had  already  said  all  there  was  to  say  without  evoking 
the  slightest  sympathy,  and  at  the  same  time  that  he  had  said 
nothing  at  all,  and  could  not  expect  these  gentlemen  to 
listen  to  the  whole  rigmarole  over  again?  And  at  such  a 
moment  Karl,  his  sole  supporter,  had  to  break  in  with  so- 
called  good  advice  which  merely  made  it  clear  that  every¬ 
thing  was  lost,  everything. 


n 


‘If  I  had  only  spoken  sooner,  instead  of  looking  out  of  the 
window/  Karl  told  himself,  dropping  his  eyes  before  the 
stoker  and  letting  his  hands  fall  to  his  sides  as  a  sign  that  all 
hope  was  ended. 

But  the  stoker  mistook  the  action,  feeling,  no  doubt,  that 
Karl  was  nursing  some  secret  reproach  against  him,  and,  in 
the  honest  desire  to  disabuse  him,  crowned  all  his  other 
offences  by  starting  to  wrangle  at  this  moment  with  Karl 
At  this  very  moment,  when  the  men  at  the  round  table  were 
completely  exasperated  by  the  senseless  babble  that  disturbed 
their  important  labours,  when  the  Head  Purser  was  gradually 
beginning  to  find  the  Captain’s  patience  incomprehensible 
and  was  just  on  the  point  of  exploding,  when  the  attendant, 
once  more  entirely  translated  to  his  masters’  sphere,  was 
measuring  the  stoker  with  savage  eyes,  and  when,  finally,  the 
gentleman  with  the  bamboo  cane,  whom  even  the  Captain 
eyed  now  and  then  in  a  friendly  manner,  already  quite  bored 
by  the  stoker,  indeed  disgusted  at  him,  had  pulled  out  a  little 
notebook  and  was  obviously  preoccupied  with  quite  different 
thoughts,  glancing  first  at  the  notebook  and  then  at  Karl. 

‘I  know,’  said  Karl,  who  had  difficulty  in  turning  aside  the 
torrent  which  the  stoker  now  directed  at  him,  but  yet  could 
summon  up  a  friendly  smile  for  him  in  spite  of  all  dissension, 
‘that  you’re  right,  you’re  right,  I  have  never  doubted  it.’  In 
his  fear  of  being  struck  by  the  stoker’s  gesticulating  hands 
he  would  have  liked  to  catch  hold  of  them,  and  still  better  to 
force  the  man  into  a  comer  so  as  to  whisper  a  few  soothing, 
reassuring  words  to  him  which  no  one  else  could  hear.  But 
the  stoker  was  past  all  bounds.  Karl  now  began  actually  to 
take  a  sort  of  comfort  in  the  thought  that  in  case  of  need  the 
stoker  could  overwhelm  the  seven  men  in  the  room  with 
the  very  strength  of  his  desperation.  But  on  the  desk,  as  he 
could  see  at  a  glance,  there  was  a  bell-arrangement  with  far 
too  many  buttons;  the  mere  pressure  of  one  hand  on  them 
would  raise  the  whole  ship  and  call  up  all  the  hostile  men 
that  filled  its  passage-ways. 

28 


But  here,  in  spite  of  his  air  of  bored  detachment,  the  gentle¬ 
man  with  the  bamboo  cane  came  over  to  Karl  and  asked,  not 
very  loudly  yet  clearly  enough  to  be  heard  above  the  stoker’s 
ravings:  ‘By  the  way,  what’s  your  name?’  At  that  moment, 
as  if  someone  behind  the  door  had  been  waiting  to  hear  this 
remark,  there  was  a  knock.  The  attendant  looked  across  at 
the  Captain;  the  Captain  nodded.  Thereupon  the  attendant 
went  to  the  door  and  Opened  it.  Outside  was  standing  a 
middle-sized  man  in  an  old  military  coat,  not  looking  at  all 
like  the  kind  of  person  who  would  attend  to  machinery  -  and 
yet  he  was  Schubal.  If  Karl  had  not  guessed  this  from  the 
expression  of  satisfaction  which  lit  up  all  eyes,  even  the 
Captain’s,  he  must  have  recognized  it  with  horror  from  the 
demeanour  of  the  stoker,  who  clenched  his  fists  at  the  end 
of  his  outstretched  arms  with  a  vehemence  that  made  the 
clenching  of  them  seem  the  most  important  thing  about  him, 
to  which  he  was  prepared  to  sacrifice  everything  else  in  life. 
All  his  strength  was  concentrated  in  his  fists,  including  the 
very  strength  that  held  him  upright. 

And  so  here  was  the  enemy,  fresh  and  gay  in  his  shore- 
going  clothes,  a  ledger  under  his  arm,  probably  containing  a 
statement  of  the  hours  worked  and  the  wages  due  to  the 
stoker,  and  he  was  openly  scanning  the  faces  of  everyone 
present,  a  frank  admission  that  his  first  concern  was  to  dis¬ 
cover  on  which  side  they  stood.  All  seven  of  them  were 
already  his  friends,  for  even  though  the  Captain  had  raised 
some  objections  to  him  earlier,  or  had  pretended  to  do  so  be¬ 
cause  he  felt  sorry  for  the  stoker,  it  was  now  apparent  that 
he  had  not  the  slightest  fault  to  find  with  Schubal.  A  man 
like  the  stoker  could  not  be  too  severely  repressed,  and  if 
Schubal  were  to  be  reproached  for  anything,  it  was  for  not 
having  subdued  the  stoker’s  recalcitrance  sufficiently,  since 
the  fellow  had  dared  to  face  the  Captain  after  all. 

Yet  it  might  still  be  assumed  that  the  confrontation  of 
Schubal  and  the  stoker  would  achieve,  even  before  a  human 
tribunal,  the  result  which  would  have  been  awarded  by  divine 

29 


justice,  since  Schubal,  even  if  he  were  good  at  making  a  show 
of  virtue,  might  easily  give  himself  away  in  the  long  run. 
A  brief  flare-up  of  his  evil  nature  would  suffice  to  reveal  it 
to  those  gentlemen,  and  Karl  would  arrange  for  that.  He 
already  had  a  rough  and  ready  knowledge  of  the  shrewd¬ 
ness,  the  weaknesses,  the  temper  of  the  various  individuals 
in  the  room,  and  in  this  respect  the  time  he  had  spent  there 
had  not  been  wasted.  It  was  a  pity  that  the  stoker  was  not 
more  competent;  he  seemed  quite  incapable  of  decisive  action. 
If  one  were  to  thrust  Schubal  at  him,  he  would  probably 
split  the  man's  hated  skull  with  his  fists.  But  it  was  beyond 
his  power  to  take  the  couple  of  steps  needed  to  bring  Schubal 
within  reach.  Why  had  Karl  not  foreseen  what  so  easily  could 
have  been  foreseen:  that  Schubal  would  inevitably  put  in 
an  appearance,  if  not  of  his  own  accord,  then  by  order  of  the 
Captain?  Why  had  he  not  outlined  an  exact  plan  of  cam¬ 
paign  with  the  stoker  when  they  were  on  their  way  here, 
instead  of  simply  walking  in,  hopelessly  unprepared,  as  soon 
as  they  found  a  door,  which  was  what  they  had  done?  Was 
the  stoker  even  capable  of  saying  a  word  by  this  time,  of 
answering  yes  and  no,  as  he  must  do  if  he  were  now  to  be 
cross-examined,  although,  to  be  sure,  a  cross-examination 
was  almost  too  much  to  hope  for?  There  he  stood,  his  legs 
a-sprawl,  his  knees  uncertain,  his  head  thrown  back,  and  the 
air  flowed  in  and  out  of  his  open  mouth  as  if  the  man  had 
no  lungs  to  control  its  motion. 

But  Karl  himself  felt  more  strong  and  clear-headed  than 
perhaps  he  had  ever  been  at  home.  If  only  his  father  and 
mother  could  see  him  now,  fighting  for  justice  in  a  strange 
land  before  men  of  authority,  and,  though  not  yet  triumph¬ 
ant,  dauntlessly  resolved  to  win  the  final  victory !  Would 
they  revise  their  opinion  of  him?  Set  him  between  them 
and  praise  him?  Look  into  his  eyes  at  last,  at  last,  those  eyes 
so  filled  with  devotion  to  them  ?  Ambiguous  questions,  and 
this  the  most  unsuitable  moment  to  ask  them  ! 

1  have  come  here  because  I  believe  this  stoker  is  accusing 


30 


me  of  dishonesty  or  something.  A  maid  in  the  kitchen  told 
me  she  saw  him  making  in  this  direction.  Captain,  and  all 
you  other  gentlemen,  I  am  prepared  to  show  papers  to  dis¬ 
prove  any  such  accusation,  and,  if  you  like,  to  adduce  the 
evidence  of  unprejudiced  and  incorruptible  witnesses,  who 
are  waiting  outside  the  door  now.’  Thus  spake  Schuhal.  It 
was,  to  be  sure,  a  clear  and  manly  statement,  and  from  the 
altered  expression  of  the  listeners  one  might  have  thought 
they  were  hearing  a  human  voice  for  the  first  time  after  a 
long  interval.  They  certainly  did  not  notice  the  holes  that 
could  be  picked  in  that  fine  speech.  Why,  for  instance,  had 
the  first  relevant  word  that  occurred  to  him  been  ‘dis¬ 
honesty’?  Should  he  have  been  accused  of  that,  perhaps 
instead  of  nationalistic  prejudice?  A  maid  in  the  kitchen  had 
seen  the  stoker  on  his  way  to  the  office,  and  Schubal  had 
immediately  divined  what  that  meant?  Wasn’t  it  his  con¬ 
sciousness  of  guilt  that  had  sharpened  his  apprehension  ?  And 
he  had  immediately  collected  witnesses,  had  he,  and  then 
called  them  unprejudiced  and  incorruptible  to  boot?  Impos¬ 
ture,  nothing  but  imposture  !  And  these  gentlemen  were  not 
only  taken  in  by  it,  but  regarded  it  with  approval?  Why  had 
he  allowed  so  much  time  to  elapse  between  the  kitchen- 
maid’s  report  and  his  arrival  here?  Simply  in  order  to  let  the 
stoker  weary  the  gentlemen,  until  they  began  to  lose  their 
powers  of  clear  judgement,  which  Schubal  feared  most  of  all. 
Standing  for  a  long  time  behind  the  door,  as  he  must  have 
done,  had  he  deliberately  refrained  from  knocking  until  he 
heard  the  casual  question  of  the  gentletnan  with  the  bam¬ 
boo  cane,  which  gave  him  grounds  to  hope  that  the  stoker 
was  already  despatched? 

Everything  was  clear  enough  now  and  Schubal’s  very  be¬ 
haviour  involuntarily  corroborated  it,  but  it  would  have  to 
be  proved  to  those  gentlemen  by  other  and  still  more  pal¬ 
pable  means.  They  must  be  shaken  up.  Now  then,  Karl, 
quick,  make  the  best  of  every  minute  you  have,  before  the 
witnesses  come  in  and  confuse  everything  I 


31 


At  that  very  moment,  however,  the  Captain  waved 
Schubal  away,  and  at  once  -  seeing  that  his  case  seemed  to 
be  provisionaliy  postponed  -  he  stepped  aside  and  was  joined 
by  the  attendant,  with  whom  he  began  a  whispered  con¬ 
versation  involving  many  side  glances  at  the  stoker  and  Karl, 
as  well  as  the  most  impressive  gestures.  It  was  as  if  Schubal 
were  rehearsing  his  next  fine  speech. 

‘Didn’t  you  want  to  ask  this  youngster  something,  Mr 
Jacob  ? '  the  Captain  said  in  the  general  silence  to  the  gentle¬ 
man  with  the  bamboo  cane. 

‘Why,  yes,’  replied  the  other,  with  a  slight  bow  in  acknow. 
ledgement  of  the  Captain’s  courtesy.  And  he  asked  Karl 
again:  ‘What  is  your  name?’ 

Karl,  who  thought  that  his  main  business  would  be  best 
served  by  satisfying  his  stubborn  questioner  as  quickly  as 
possible,  replied  briefly,  without,  as  was  his  custom,  intro¬ 
ducing  himself  by  means  of  his  passport,  which  he  would 
have  had  to  tug  out  of  his  pocket :  ‘Karl  Rossmann.’ 

‘But  really!’  said  the  gentleman  who  had  been  addressed 
as  Jacob,  recoiling  with  an  almost  incredulous  smile.  The 
Captain  too,  the  Head  Purser,  the  ship’s  officer,  even  the 
attendant,  all  showed  an  excessive  astonishment  on  hearing 
Karl’s  name.  Only  the  Harbour  Officials  and  Schubal  re¬ 
mained  indifferent. 

‘But  really!’  repeated  Mr  Jacob,  walking  a  little  stiffly 
up  to  Karl,  ‘then  I’m  your  Uncle  Jacob  and  you’re  my  own 
dear  nephew.  I  suspected  it  all  the  time !  ’  he  said  to  the 
Captain  before  embracing  and  kissing  Karl,  who  dumbly 
submitted  to  everything. 

‘And  what  may  your  name  be?’  asked  Karl  when  he  felt 
himself  released  again,  very  courteously,  but  quite  coolly, 
trying  hard  to  estimate  the  consequences  which  this  new 
development  might  have  for  the  stoker.  At  the  moment, 
there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  Schubal  could  extract  any 
advantage  out  of  it. 

‘But  don’t  you  understand  your  good  fortune,  young 
3* 


man?’  said  the  Captain,  who  thought  that  Mr  Jacob  was 
wounded  in  his  dignity  by  Karl’s  question,  for  he  had  re¬ 
tired  to  the  window,  obviously  to  conceal  from  the  others 
the  agitation  on  his  face,  which  he  also  kept  dabbing  with 
a  handkerchief.  ‘It  is  Senator  Edward  Jacob  who  has  just 
declared  himself  to  be,  your  uncle.  You  have  now  a  brilliant 
career  in  front  of  you,  against  all  your  previous  expectations, 
I  dare  say.  Try  to  realize  this,  as  far  as  you  can  in  the  first 
shock  of  the  moment,  and  pull  yourself  together  !  ’ 

‘I  certainly  have  an  Uncle  Jacob  in  America/  said  Karl, 
turning  to  the  Captain,  ‘but  if  I  understand  rightly,  Jacob  is 
only  the  surname  of  this  gentleman.’ 

‘That  is  so/.said  the  Captain,  encouragingly. 

‘Well,  my  Uncle  Jacob,  who  is  my  mother’s  brother,  had 
Jacob  for  a  Christian  name,  but  his  surname  must  of  course 
be  the  same  as  my  mother’s,  whose  maiden  name  was  Ben- 
delmayer/ 

‘Gentlemen!’  cried  the  Senator,  coming  forward  in  re¬ 
sponse  to  Karl’s  explanation,  quite  cheerful  now  after  his 
recuperative  retreat  to  the  window.  Everyone  except  the 
Harbour  Officials  laughed  a  little,  some  as  if  really  touched, 
others  for  no  visible  reason. 

‘Yet  what  I  said  wasn’t  so  ridiculous  as  all  that/  thought 
Karl. 

‘Gentlemen/  repeated  the  Senator,  ‘you  are  involved 
against  my  will  and  your  own  in  a  little  family  scene,  and  so 
I  can’t  but  give  you  an  explanation,  since,  I  fancy,  no  one 
but  the  Captain  here’  -  this  reference  was  followed  by  a 
reciprocal  bow  -  ‘is  fully  informed  of  the  circumstances.’ 

‘Now  I  must  really  attend  to  every  word/  Karl  told  himself, 
and  glancing  over  his  shoulder  he  was  delighted  to  see  that 
life  was  beginning  to  return  to  the  figure  of  the  stoker. 

‘For  the  many  years  of  my  sojourn  in  America  -  though 
sojourn  is  hardly  the  right  word  to* use  of  an  American  citi¬ 
zen,  and  I  am  an  American  citizen  from  my  very  heart  - 
for  all  these  many  years,  then,  I  have  lived  completely  cut 

33 


off  from  my  relatives  in  Europe,  for  reasons  which,  in  the 
first  place,  do  not  concern  us  here,  and  in  the  second,  would 
really  give  me  too  much  pain  to  relate.  I  actually  dread  the 
moment  when  I  may  be  forced  to  explain  them  to  my  dear 
nephew,  for  some  frank  criticisms  of  his  parents  and  their 
friends  will  be  unavoidable.  I’m  afraid/ 

‘It  is  my  uncle,  no  doubt  about  it/  Karl  told  himself, 
listening  eagerly,  ‘he  must  have  had  his  name  changed/ 

‘Now,  my  dear  nephew  has  simply  been  turned  out  -  we 
may  as  well  call  a  spade  a  spade  -  has  simply  been  turned 
out  by  his  parents,  just  as  you  turn  a  cat  out  of  the  house 
when  it  annoys  you.  I  have  no  intention  of  extenuating 
what  my  nephew  did  to  merit  that  punishment,  yet  his  trans¬ 
gression  was  of  a  kind  that  merely  needs  to  be  named  to  find 
indulgence/ 

‘That's  not  too  bad/  thought  Karl,  ‘but  I  hope  he  won’t 
tell  the  whole  story.  Anyhow,  he  can’t  know  much  about 
it.  Who  would  tell  him  V 

‘For  he  was/  Uncle  Jacob  went  on,  rocking  himself  a  little 
on  the  bamboo  cane  which  was  braced  in  front  of  him,  a 
gesture  that  actually  succeeded  in  deprecating  any  unneces¬ 
sary  solemnity  which  otherwise  must  have  characterized 
his  statement,  ‘for  he  was  seduced  by  a  maidservant, 
Johanna  Brummer,  a  person  of  round  about  thirty-five.  It  is 
far  from  my  wishes  to  offend  my  nephew  by  using  the  word 
“seduced”,  but  it  is  difficult  to  find  another  and  equally  suit¬ 
able  word.’ 

Karl,  who  had  moved  up  quite  close  to  his  uncle,  turned 
round  to  read  from  the  gentlemen’s  faces,  the  impression  the 
story  had  made.  None  of  them  laughed,  all  were  listening 
patiently  and  seriously.  After  all,  one  did  not  laugh  at  the 
nephew  of  a  Senator  on  the  first  possible  opportunity.  It  was 
rather  the  stoker  who  now  smiled  at  Karl,  though  very 
faintly,  but  that  was  satisfactory  in  the  first  place,  as  a  sign 
of  reviving  life,  and  excusable  in  the  second  place,  since 
in  the  stoker’s  bunk  Karl  had  tried  to  make  an  impenetrable 

34 


mystery  of  this  very  story  which  was  now  being  made  so 
public. 

‘Now  this  Brummer/  Uncle  Jacob  went  on,  ‘had  a  child 
by  my  nephew,  a  healthy  boy,  who  was  given  the  baptismal 
name  of  Jacob,  evidently  in  memory  of  my  unworthy  self, 
since  my  nephew's  doubtless  quite  casual  references  to  me  had 
managed  to  make  a  deep  impression  on  the  woman.  Fortun¬ 
ately,  let  me  add.  For  the  boy’s  parents,  to  avoid  alimony  or 
being  personally  involved  in  any  scandal  -  I  must  insist  that 
I  know  neither  how  the  law  stands  in  their  district  nor  their 
general  circumstances  -  to  avoid  the  scandal,  then,  and  the 
payment  of  alimony,  they  packed  off  their  son,  my  dear 
nephew,  to  America,  shamefully  unprovided-for,  as  you  can 
see,  and  the  poor  lad,  but  for  the  signs  and  wonders  which 
still  happen  in  America  if  nowhere  else,  would  have  come  to 
a  wretched  end  in  New  York,  being  thrown  entirely  on  his 
own  resources,  if  this  servant  girl  hadn’t  written  a  letter  to 
me,  which  after  long  delays  reached  me  the  day  before  yes¬ 
terday,  giving  me  the  whole  story,  along  with  a  description 
of  my  nephew  and,  very  wisely,  the  name  of  the  ship  as  well. 
If  I  were  setting  out  to  entertain  you,  gentlemen,  I  could 
read  a  few  passages  to  you  from  this  letter’  -  he  pulled  out 
and  flourished  before  them  two  huge,  closely  written  sheets 
of  letter-paper.  ‘You  would  certainly  be  interested,  for  the 
letter  is  written  with  somewhat  simple  but  well-meant  cun¬ 
ning  and  with  much  loving  care  for  the  father  of  the  child. 
But  I  have  no  intention  either  of  entertaining  you  for  longer 
than  my  explanation  needs,  or  of  wounding  at  the  very  start 
the  perhaps  still  sensitive  feelings  of  my  nephew,  who  if  he 
likes  can  read  the  letter  for  his  own  instruction  in  the  seclu¬ 
sion  of  the  room  already  waiting  for  him/ 

But  Karl  had  no  feelings  for  Johanna  Brummer.  Hemmed 
in  by  a  vanishing  past,  she  sat  in  her  kitchen  beside  the 
kitchen  dresser,  resting  her  elbows  %on  top  of  it.  She  looked 
at  him  whenever  he  came  to  the  kitchen  to  fetch  a  glass  of 
water  for  his  father  or  do  some  errand  for  his  mother. 


35 


Sometimes,  awkwardly  sitting  sideways  at  the  dresser,  she 
would  write  a  letter,  drawing  her  inspiration  from  Karl’s  face. 
Sometimes  she  would  sit  with  her  hand  over  her  eyes,  heed¬ 
ing  nothing  that  was  said  to  her.  Sometimes  she  would  kneel 
in  her  tiny  room  next  the  kitchen  and  pray  to  a  wooden 
crucifix;  then  Karl  would  feel  shy  if  he  passed  by  and  caught 
a  glimpse  of  her  through  the  crack  of  the  slightly  open  door. 
Sometimes  she  would  bustle  about  her  kitchen  and  recoil, 
laughing  like  a  witch,  if  Karl  came  near  her.  Sometimes  she 
would  shut  the  kitchen  door  after  Karl  entered,  and  keep 
hold  of  the  door-handle  until  he  had  to  beg  to  be  let  out. 
Sometimes  she  would  bring  him  things  which  he  did  not 
want  and  press  them  silently  into  his  hand.  And  once  she 
called  him  ‘Karl’  and,  while  he  was  still  dumbfounded  at 
this  unusual  familiarity,  led  him  into  her  room,  sighing  and 
grimacing,  and  locked  the  door.  Then  she  flung  her  arms 
round  his  neck,  almost  choking  him,  and  while  urging  him 
to  take  off  her  clothes,  she  really  took  off  his  and  laid  him 
on  her  bed,  as  if  she  would  never  give  him  up  to  anyone 
and  would  tend  and  cherish  him  to  the  end  of  time.  ‘Oh 
Karl,  my  Karl !  ’  she  cried;  it  was  as  if  her  eyes  were  de¬ 
vouring  him,  while  his  eyes  saw  nothing  at  all  and  he  felt  un¬ 
comfortable  in  all  the  warm  bedclothes  which  she  seemed 
to  have  piled  up  for  him  alone.  Then  she  lay  down  by  him 
and  wanted  some  secret  from  him,  but  he  could  tell  her 
none,  and  she  showed  anger,  either  in  jest  or  in  earnest,  shook 
him,  listened  to  his  heart,  offered  her  breast  that  he  might 
listen  to  hers  in  turn,  but  could  not  bring  him  to  do  it, 
pressed  her  naked  belly  against  his  body,  felt  with  her  hand 
between  his  legs,  so  disgustingly  that  his  head  and  neck 
started  up  from  the  pillows,  then  thrust  her  body  several 
times  against  him  -  it  was  as  if  she  were  part  of  himself, 
and  for  that  reason,  perhaps,  he  was  seized  with  a  terrible 
feeling  of  yearning.  With  the  tears  running  down  his  cheeks 
he  reached  his  own  bed  at  last,  after  many  entreaties  from 
her  to  come  again.  That  was  all  that  had  happened,  and  yet 

36 


his  uncle  had  managed  to  make  a  great  song  out  of  it.  And 
it  seemed  the  cook  had  also  been  thinking  about  him  and  had 
informed  his  uncle  of  his  arrival.  That  had  been  very  good 
of  her  and  he  would  make  some  return  for  it  later,  if  he 
could. 

‘And  now/  cried,  the  Senator,  T  want  you  to  tell  me  can¬ 
didly  whether  I  am  your  uncle  or  not  ?  ’ 

Tou  are  my  uncle/  said  Karl,  kissing  his  hand  and  receiv¬ 
ing  a  kiss  on  the  brow.  Tm  very  glad  to  have  found  you,  but 
you’re  mistaken  if  you  think  my  father  and  mother  never 
speak  kindly  of  you.  In  any  case,  you’ve  got  some  points 
quite  wrong  in  your  story;  I  mean  that  it  didn’t  all  happen 
like  that  in  reality.  But  you  can’t  really  be  expected  to  un¬ 
derstand  things  at  such  a  distance,  and  I  fancy  it  won’t  do 
any  great  harm  if  these  gentlemen  are  somewhat  incorrectly 
informed  about  the  details  of  an  affair  which  can’t  have 
much  interest  for  them/ 

‘Well  spoken/  said  the  Senator,  leading  Karl  up  to  the 
Captain,  who  was  visibly  sympathetic,  and  asking :  ‘Haven’t 
I  a  splendid  nephew?’ 

‘I  am  delighted/  said  the  Captain,  making  a  bow  which 
showed  his  military  training,  ‘to  have  met  your  nephew,  Mr 
Senator.  My  ship  is  highly  honoured  in  providing  the  scene 
for  such  a  reunion.  But  the  voyage  in  the  steerage  must 
have  been  very  unpleasant,  for  we  have,  of  course,  all  kinds 
of  people  travelling  steerage.  We  do  everything  possible  to 
make  conditions  tolerable,  far  more,  for  instance,  than  the 
American  lines  do,  but  to  turn  such  a  passage  into  pleasure 
is  more  than  we’ve  been. able  to  manage  yet/ 

‘It  did  me  no  harm/  said  Karl. 

‘It  did  him  no  harm!’  repeated  the  Senator,  laughing 
loudly. 

‘Except  that  I’m  afraid  I’ve  lost  my  box  and  with  that 
he  remembered  all  that,  had  happened  and  all  that  remained 
to  be  done,  and  he  looked  round  him  and  saw  the  others 
still  in  the  same  places,  silent  with  respect  and  surprise,  their 

32 


eyes  fixed  upon  him.  Only  the  Harbour  Officials,  in  so  far 
as  their  severe,  self-satisfied  faces  were  legible,  betrayed  some 
regret  at  having  come  at  such  an  unpropitious  time,  and  the 
watch  which  they  had  laid  on  the  table  before  them  was 
probably  more  important  to  them  than  everything  that  had 
happened  in  the  room  or  might  still  happen  there. 

The  first  to  express  his  sympathy,  after  the  Captain,  was 
curiously  enough  the  stoker.  T  congratulate  you  heartily/ 
he  said,  and  shook  Karl's  hand,  making  the  gesture  a  token 
of  something  like  gratitude.  Yet  when  he  turned  to  the 
Senator  with  the  same  words  the  Senator  drew  back,  as  if 
the  stoker  were  exceeding  his  rights;  and  the  stoker  im¬ 
mediately  retreated. 

But  the  others  now  saw  what  should  be  done  and  at  once 
pressed  in  a  confused  throng  round  Karl  and  the  Senator. 
So  it  happened  that  Karl  actually  received  Schubal's  con¬ 
gratulations,  accepted  them  and  thanked  him  for  them.  The 
last  to  advance  in  the  ensuing  lull  were  the  Harbour  Offi¬ 
cials,  who  said  two  words  in  English,  which  made  a  ludi¬ 
crous  impression. 

The  Senator  now  felt  moved  to  extract  the  last  ounce  of 
enjoyment  from  the  situation  by  refreshing  his  own  and  the 
other’s  minds  with  the  less  important  details,  and  this  was 
not  merely  tolerated  but  of  course  welcomed  with  interest 
by  everyone.  So  he  told  them  that  he  had  entered  in  his  note¬ 
book,  for  consultation  in  a  possible  emergency,  his  nephew’s 
most  distinctive  characteristics  as  enumerated  by  the  cook 
in  her  letter.  Bored  by  the  stoker’s  ravings,  he  had  pulled 
out  the  notebook  simply  to  distract  himself,  and  had  begun 
for  his  own  amusement  to  compare  the  cook’s  descriptions, 
which  were  not  so  exact  as  a  detective  might  wish,  with 
Karl’s  appearance.  ‘And  that’s  how  to  find  a  nephew !  ’  he 
concluded  proudly,  as  if  he  wanted  to  be  congratulated  all 
over  again. 

‘What  will  happen  to  the  stoker  now?’  asked  Karl, 
ignoring  his  uncle’s  last  remarks.  In  his  new  circumstances 

38 


he  thought  he  was  entitled  to  say  whatever  came  into  his 
mind. 

/The  stoker  will  get  what  he  deserves/  said  the  Senator, 
'and  what  the  Captain  considers  to  be  right.  I  think  we  have 
had  enough  and  more  than  enough  of  the  stoker,  a  view  in 
which  every  gentleman  here  will  certainly  concur/ 

‘But  that's  not  the  point  in  a  question  of  justice/  said  Karl. 
He  was  standing  between  his  uncle  and  the  Captain,  and, 
perhaps  influenced  by  his  position,  thought  that  he  was 
holding  the  balance  between  them. 

And  yet  the  stoker  seemed  to  have  abandoned  hope.  His 
hands  were  half  stuck  into  the  belt  of  his  trousers,  which 
together  with  a  strip  of  checked  shirt  had  come  prominently 
into  view  during  his  excited  tirade.  That  did  not  worry  him 
in  the  least;  he  had  displayed  the  misery  of  his  heart,  now 
they  might  as  well  see  the  rags  that  covered  his  body,  and 
then  they  could  thrust  him  out.  He  had  decided  that  the 
attendant  and  Schubal,  as  the  two  least  important  men  in  the 
room,  should  do  him  that  last  kindness.  Schubal  would  have 
peace  then  and  no  longer  be  driven  to  desperation,  as  the 
Head  Purser  had  put  it.  The  Captain  could  take  on  crowds  of 
Roumanians;  Roumanian  would  be  spoken  all  over  the  ship; 
and  then  perhaps  things  would  really  be  all  right.  There 
would  be  no  stoker  pestering  the  head  office  any  more  with 
his  ravings,  yet  his  last  effort  would  be  held  in  almost  friendly 
memory,  since,  as  the  Senator  expressly  declared,  it  had  been 
the  direct  cause  of  his  recognizing  his  nephew.  The  nephew 
himself  had  several  times  tried  to  help  him  already  and  so  had 
more  than  repaid  him  beforehand  for  his  services  in  the 
recognition  scene;  it  did  not  even  occur  to  the  stoker  to  ask 
anything  else  from  him  now.  Besides,  even  if  he  were  the 
nephew  of  a  senator,  he  was  far  from  being  a  captain  yet, 
and*  it  was  from  the  mouth  of  the  Captain  that  the  stern 
verdict  would  fall.  And  thinking  ^11  this,  the  stoker  did  his 
best  not  to  look  at  Karl,  though  unfortunately  in  that  room¬ 
ful  of  enemies  there  was  no  other  resting-place  for  his  eyes. 

39 


‘Don’t  mistake  the  situation/  said  the  Senator  to  Karl, 
‘this  may  be  a  question  of  justice,  but  at  the  same  time  it’s  a 
question  of  discipline.  On  this  ship  both  of  these,  and  most 
especially  the  latter,  are  entirely  within  the  discretion  of  the 
Captain/ 

‘That’s  right/  muttered  the  stoker.  Those  who  heard  him 
and  understood  smiled  uneasily. 

‘But  we  have  already  obstructed  the  Captain  far  too  long 
in  his  official  duties,  which  must  be  piling  up  considerably 
now  that  he  has  reached  New  York,  and  it’s  high  time  we 
left  the  ship,  instead  of  adding  to  our  sins  by  interfering 
quite  unnecessarily  in  this  petty  quarrel  between  two 
mechanics  and  so  making  it  a  matter  of  importance.  I  under¬ 
stand  your  attitude  perfectly,  my  dear  nephew,  but  that  very 
fact  justifies  me  in  hurrying  you  away  from  here 
immediately/ 

‘I  shall  have  a  boat  lowered  for  you  at  once/  said  the 
Captain,  without  deprecating  in  the  least  the  Senator’s  words, 
to  Karl’s  great  surprise,  since  his  uncle  could  be  said  to  have 
humbled  himself.  The  Head  Purser  rushed  hastily  to  his  desk 
and  telephoned  the  Captain’s  order  to  the  bos’un.  ‘There’s 
hardly  any  time  left,’  Karl  told  himself,  ‘but  I  can’t  do  any¬ 
thing  without  offending  everybody.  I  really  can’t  desert  my 
uncle  now,  just  when  he’s  found  me.  The  Captain  is  certainly 
polite,  but  that’s  all.  In  matters  of  discipline  his  politeness 
fades  out.  And  my  uncle  certainly  meant  what  he  said.  I  don’t 
want  to  speak  to  Schubal;  I’m  sorry  that  I  even  shook  hands 
with  him.  And  the  other  people  here  are  of  no  consequence/ 

Thinking  these  things  he  slowly  went  over  to  the  stoker, 
pulled  the  man’s  right  hand  out  of  his  belt  and  held  it  gently 
in  his. 

‘Why  don’t  you  say  something?’  he  asked.  ‘Why  do  you 
put  up  with  everything?’ 

The  stoker  merely  knitted  his  brows,  as  if  he  were  seeking 
some  formula  for  what  he  had  to  say.  While  doing  this  he 
looked  down  at  his  own  hand  and  Karl's. 


40 


'You’ve  been  unjustly  treated,  more  than  anyone  else  on 
this  ship;  I  know  that  well  enough.’  And  Karl  drew  his 
fingers  backwards  and  forwards  between  the  stoker’s,  while 
the  stoker  gazed  round  him  with  shining  eyes,  as  if  blessed 
by  a  great  happiness  that  no  one  could  grudge  him. 

‘Now  you  must  get  ready  to  defend  yourself,  answer  yes 
and  no,  or  else  these  people  won’t  have  any  idea  of  the  truth. 
You  must  promise  me  to  do  what  I  tell  you,  for  I’m  afraid, 
and  I’ve  good  reason  for  it,  that  I  won’t  be  able  to  help  you 
any  more.’  And  then  Karl  burst  out  crying  and  kissed  the 
stoker’s  hand,  taking  that  seamed,  almost  nerveless  hand  and 
pressing  it  to  his  cheek  like  a  treasure  which  he  would  soon 
have  to  give  up.  But  now  his  uncle  the  Senator  was  at  his 
side  and  very  gently  yet  firmly  led  him  away. 

The  stoker  seems  to  have  bewitched  you,’  he  said,  ex¬ 
changing  an  understanding  look  with  the  Captain  over 
Karl’s  head.  ‘You  felt  lonely,  then  you  found  the  stoker,  and 
you’re  grateful  to  him  now;  that’s  all  to  your  credit,  I’m  sure. 
But  if  only  for  my  sake,  don’t  push  things  too  far,  learn  to 
understand  your  position.’ 

Outside  the  door  a  hubbub  had  arisen,  shouts  could  be 
heard;  it  sounded  even  as  if  someone  were  being  brutally 
banged  against  the  door.  A  sailor  entered  in  a  somewhat 
dishevelled  state  with  a  girl's  apron  tied  round  his  waist. 
‘There’s  a  mob  outside,’  he  cried,  thrusting  out  his  elbows  as 
if  he  were  still  pushing  his  way  through  a  crowd.  He  came 
to  himself  with  a  start  and  made  to  salute  the  Captain,  but 
at  that  moment  he  noticed  the  apron,  tore  it  off,  threw  it  on 
the  floor  and  shouted:  ‘This  is  a  bit  too  much;  they’ve  tied 
a  girl’s  apron  on  me.’  Then  he  clicked  his  heels  together  and 
saluted.  Someone  began  to  laugh,  but  the  Captain  said 
severely:  ‘This  is  a  fine  state  of  things.  Who  is  outside?’ 

‘It’s  my  witnesses,'  said  Schubal,  stepping  forward.  ‘I  hum¬ 
bly  beg  your  pardon,  sir,  for  their%bad  behaviour.  The  men 
sometimes  go  a  bit  wild  when  they’ve  finished  a  voyage.’ 

‘Bring  them  in  here  at  once!’  the  Captain  ordered,  then 


4i 


immediately  turning  to  the  Senator  said,  politely  but  hastily: 
'Have  the  goodness  now,  Mr  Senator,  to  take  your  nephew 
and  follow  this  man,  who  will  conduct  you  to  your  boat.  I 
need  hardly  say  what  a  pleasure  and  an  honour  it  has  been 
to  me  to  make  your  personal  acquaintance.  I  only  wish,  Mr 
Senator,  that  I  may  have  an  early  opportunity  to  resume  our 
interrupted  talk  about  the  state  of  the  American  fleet,  and 
that  it  may  be  again  interrupted  in  as  pleasant  a  manner/ 

'One  nephew  is  quite  enough  for  me,  I  assure  you/  said 
Karl's  uncle,  laughing.  ‘And  now  accept  my  best  thanks  for 
your  kindness  and  good-bye.  Besides  it  isn't  altogether  impos¬ 
sible  that  we'  -  he  put  his  arm  warmly  round  Karl  -  'might 
see  quite  a  lot  of  you  on  our  next  voyage  to  Europe/ 

'That  would  give  me  great  pleasure/  said  the  Captain. 
The  two  gentlemen  shook  hands  with  each  other,  Karl  barely 
touched  the  Captain's  hand  in  silent  haste,  for  the  latter's 
attention  was  already  engrossed  by  the  fifteen  men  who  were 
now  being  shepherded  into  the  room  by  Schubal,  somewhat 
chastened  but  still  noisy  enough.  The  sailor  begged  the 
Senator  to  let  him  lead  the  way  and  opened  a  path  through 
the  crowd  for  him  and  Karl,  so  that  they  passed  with  ease 
through  ranks  of  bowing  men.  It  seemed  that  these  good- 
natured  fellows  regarded  the  quarrel  between  Schubal  and 
the  stoker  as  a  joke,  and  not  even  the  Captain's  presence 
could  make  them  take  it  seriously.  Karl  noticed  among  them 
the  kitchen-maid  Lina,  who  with  a  sly  wink  at  him  was  now 
tying  round  her  waist  the  apron  which  the  sailor  had  flung 
away,  for  it  was  hers. 

Still  following  the  sailor,  they  left  the  office  and  turned 
into  a  small  passage  which  brought  them  in  a  couple  of  steps 
to  a  little  door,  from  which  a  short  ladder  led  down  to  the 
boat  that  was  waiting  for  them.  Their  conductor  leapt  down 
into  the  boat  with  a  single  bound,  and  the  sailors  in  the  boat 
rose  and  saluted.  The  Senator  was  just  warning  Karl  to  be 
careful  how  he  came  down,  when  Karl,  as  he  stood  on  the 
top  rung,  burst  into  violent  sobs.  The  Senator  put  his  right 

42 


hand  under  Karl's  chin,  drew  him  close  to  him  and  caressed 
him  with  his  left  hand.  In  this  posture  they  slowly  descended 
step  by  step  and,  still  clinging  together,  entered  the  boat, 
where  the  Senator  found  a  comfortable  place  for  Karl,  imme¬ 
diately  facing  him.  At  a  sign  from  the  Senator  the  sailors 
pushed  off  from  the  ship  and  at  once  began  rowing  at  full 
speed.  They  were  scarcely  a  few  yards  from  the  ship  when 
Karl  made  the  unexpected  discovery  that  they  were  on  the 
side  of  the  ship  towards  which  the  windows  of  the  office 
looked  out.  All  three  windows  were  filled  with  Schubal’s 
witnesses,  who  saluted  and  waved  in  the  most  friendly  way; 
Uncle  Jacob  actually  waved  back  and  one  of  the  sailors 
showed  his  skill  by  flinging  a  kiss  towards  the  ship  without 
interrupting  the  regular  rhythm  of  his  rowing.  It  was  now  as 
if  there  were  really  no  stoker  at  all.  Karl  took  a  more  careful 
look  at  his  uncle,  whose  knees  were  almost  touching  his  own, 
and  doubts  came  into  his  mind  whether  this  man  would  ever 
be  able  to  take  the  stoker’s  place.  And  his  uncle  evaded  his 
eye  and  stared  at  the  waves  on  which  their  boat  was  tossing. 


2.  Uncle  Jacob 


In  his  uncle's  house  Karl  soon  became  used  to  his  new  circum¬ 
stances.  But,  indeed,  his  uncle  indulged  his  slightest  wishes 
and  Karl  had  never  to  learn  by  hard  experience,  which  so 
much  embitters  one's  first  acquaintance  with  foreign 
countries. 

Karl's  room  was  on  the  sixth  floor  of  a  house  whose  five 
other  floors,  along  with  three  more  in  the  basement,  were 
taken  up  by  his  uncle's  business.  It  was  so  light,  what  with 
its  two  windows  and  a  door  opening  on  a  balcony,  that  Karl 
was  filled  with  fresh  astonishment  every  morning  on  coming 
into  it  out  of  his  tiny  bedroom.  Where  might  he  not  have 
had  to  stay,  if  he  had  landed  in  this  country  as  a  destitute 
little  emigrant?  Indeed,  as  his  uncle,  with  his  knowledge  of 
the  emigration  laws,  thought  highly  probable,  Karl  might 
not  have  been  admitted  into  the  United  States  at  all  and 
might  have  been  sent  home  again  without  regard  to  the  fact 
that  he  no  longer  had  a  home.  In  this  country  sympathy  was 
something  you  could  not  hope  for;  in  that  respect  America 
resembled  what  Karl  had  read  about  it;  except  that  those 
who  were  fortunate  seemed  really  to  enjoy  their  good  fortune 
here,  sunning  themselves  among  their  carefree  friends. 

A  narrow  outside  balcony  ran  along  the  whole  length  of 
Karl’s  room.  But  what  would  have  been  at  home  the  highest 
vantage  point  in  the  town  allowed  him  here  little  more  than 
a  view  of  one  street,  which  ran  perfectly  straight  between 
two  rows  of  squarely  chopped  buildings  and  therefore  seemed 
to  be  fleeing  into  the  distance,  where  the  outlines  of  a  cathe¬ 
dral  loomed  enormous  in  a  dense  haze.  From  morning  to 


'  44 


evening  and  far  into  the  dreaming  night  that  street  was  the 
channel  for  a  constant  stream  of  traffic  which,  seen  from 
above,  looked  like  an  inextricable  confusion,  for  ever  newly 
improvised,  of  foreshortened  human  figures  and  the  roofs  of 
all  kinds  of  vehicles,  sending  into  the  upper  air  another  con¬ 
fusion,  more  riotous  and  complicated,  of  noises,  dust  and 
smells,  all  of  it  enveloped  and  penetrated  by  a  flood  of  light 
which  the  multitudinous  objects  in  the  street  scattered,  car¬ 
ried  off  and  again  busily  brought  back,  with  an  effect  as 
palpable  to  the  dazzled  eye  as  if  a  glass  roof  stretched  over 
the  street  were,  being  violently  smashed  into  fragments  at 
every  moment. 

Cautious  in  all  things,  Uncle  Jacob  advised  Karl  for  the 
time  being  to  take  up  nothing  seriously.  He  should  certainly 
examine  and  consider  everything,  but  without  committing 
himself.  The  first  days  of  a  European  in  America  might  be 
likened  to  a  re-birth,  and  though  Karl  was  not  to  worry  about 
it  unduly,  since  one  got  used  to  things  here  more  quickly 
than  an  infant  coming  into  the  world  from  the  other  side, 
yet  he  must  keep  in  mind  that  first  judgements  were  always 
unreliable  and  that  one  should  not  let  them  prejudice  the 
future  judgements  which  would  eventually  shape  one’s  life 
in  America.  He  himself  had  known  new-comers,  for  example, 
who,  instead  of  following  these  wise  precepts  had  stood  all 
day  on  their  balconies  gaping  down  at  the  street  like  lost 
sheep.  That  was  bound  to  lead  to  bewilderment !  The  solitary 
indulgence  of  idly  gazing  at  the  busy  life  of  New  York  was 
permissible  in  anyone  travelling  for  pleasure,  perhaps  even 
advisable  within  limits;  but  for  one  who  intended  to  remain 
in  the  States  it  was  sheer  ruination,  a  term  by  no  means  too 
emphatic,  although  it  might  be  exaggerated.  And,  indeed, 
Uncle  Jacob  frowned  with  annoyance  if  ever  he  found  Karl 
out  on  the  balcony  when  he  paid  one  of  his  visits,  which 
always  occurred  once  daily  and  a^  the  most  diverse  hours. 
Karl  soon  noticed  this  and  in  consequence  denied  himself  as 
much  as  possible  the  pleasure  of  lingering  on  the  balcony. 


45 


However,  it  was  by  no  means  the  sole  pleasure  that  he  had. 
In  his  room  stood  an  American  writing-desk  of  superior  con¬ 
struction,  such  as  his  father  had  coveted  for  years  and  tried 
to  pick  up  cheaply  at  all  kinds  of  auction  sales  without  ever 
succeeding,  his  resources  being  much  too  small.  This  desk, 
of  course,  was  beyond  all  comparison  with  the  so-called 
American  writing-desk  which  turned  up  at  auction  sales  in 
Europe.  For  example,  it  had  a  hundred  compartments  of 
different  sizes,  in  which  the  President  of  the  Union  himself 
could  have  found  a  fitting  place  for  each  of  his  state  docu¬ 
ments;  there  was  also  a  regulator  at  one  side  and  by  turning 
a  handle  you  could  produce  the  most  complicated  combina¬ 
tions  and  permutations  of  the  compartments  to  please  your¬ 
self  and  suit  your  requirements.  Thin  panels  sank  slowly  and 
formed  the  bottom  of  a  new  series  or  the  top  of  existing 
drawers  promoted  from  below;  even  after  one  turn  of  the 
handle  the  disposition  of  the  whole  was  quite  changed  and 
the  transformation  took  place  slowly  or  at  delirious  speed 
according  to  the  rate  at  which  you  wound  the  thing  round. 
It  was  a  very  modem  invention,  yet  it  reminded  Karl  vividly 
of  the  traditional  Christmas  panorama  which  was  shown  to 
gaping  children  in  the  market-place  at  home,  where  he  too, 
well  wrapped  in  his  winter  clothes,  had  often  stood  en¬ 
thralled,  closely  comparing  the  movement  of  the  handle, 
which  was  turned  by  an  old  man,  with  the  changes  in  the 
scene,  the  jerky  advance  of  the  Three  Holy  Kings,  the  shin¬ 
ing  out  of  the  Star  and  the  humble  life  of  the  Holy  Manger. 
And  it  had  always  seemed  to  him  that  his  mother,  as  she 
'  stood  behind  him,  did  not  follow  every  detail  with  sufficient 
attention.  He  would  draw  her  close  to  him,  until  he  could 
feel  her  pressing  against  his  back,  and  shouting  art  the  top  of 
his  voice  would  keep  pointing  out  to  her  the  less  noticeable 
occurrences,  perhaps  a  little  hare  among  the  grass  in  the 
foreground,  sitting  up  on  its  hind  legs  and  then  crouching 
as  if  to  dart  off  again,  until  his  mother  would  cover  his  mouth 
with  her  hand  and  very  likely  relapse  into  her  former  inatten- 

46 


tion.  The  desk  was  certainly  not  made  merely  to  remind  him 
of  such  things,  yet  in  the  history  of  its  invention  there 
probably  existed  some  vague  connexion  similar  to  that  in 
Karl’s  memory.  Unlike  Karl,  Uncle  Jacob  by  no  means 
approved  of  this  particular  desk;  he  had  merely  wanted  to 
buy  a  well-appointed  writing-desk  for  Karl,  but  nowadays 
these  were  all  furnished  with  this  new  apparatus,  which  had 
also  the  advantage  that  it  could  be  fitted  to  more  old-fashioned 
desks  without  great  expense.  At  any  rate,  Karl’s  uncle  never 
omitted  to  advise  him  against  using  the  regulator  at  all,  if 
possible,  and  reinforced  his  advice  by  pointing  out  that  the 
mechanism  was  very  sensitive,  could  easily  be  put  out  of 
order  and  was  very  expensive  to  repair  again.  It  was ''not 
hard  to  guess  that  these  remarks  were  merely  pretexts, 
though  on  the  other  hand  it  would  have  been  quite  easy  to 
lock  the  regulator  and  yet  Uncle  Jacob  refrained  from  doing 
so. 

In  the  first  few  days,  during  which  Karl  and  his  uncle 
naturally  had  a  good  number  of  talks  together,  Karl  men¬ 
tioned  that  at  home  he  had  been  fond  of  playing  the  piano, 
though  he  had  not  played  it  much,  having  had  no  teaching 
except  his  mother’s  rudimentary  instructions.  Karl  was  quite 
well  aware  that  to  volunteer  this  information  was  virtually 
to  ask  for  a  piano,  but  he  had  already  used  his  eyes  sufficiently 
to  know  that  his  uncle  could  afford  to  be  lavish.  Yet  this  sug¬ 
gestion  was  not  acted  upon  at  once;  but  some  eight  days  later 
his  uncle  said,  almost  as  if  making  a  reluctant  admission, 
that  the  piano  had  just  arrived  and  Karl,  if  he  liked,  could 
supervise  its  transport.  That  was  an  easy  enough  task,  yet 
not  much  easier  than  the  transport  itself,  for  the  building 
had  a  furniture  lift  in  which,  without  any  difficulty,  a  whole 
furniture  van  could  have  been  accommodated,  and  in  this 
lift  the  piano  soared  up  to  Karl’s  room.  Karl  could  have  gone 
up  himself  in  the  same  lift  as  the  piano  and  the  workmen, 
but  just  beside  it  there  was  an  ordinary  lift  free,  so  he  went 
up  in  that  instead,  keeping  himself  at  the  same  elevation  as 


47 


the  other  by  meaus  of  a  lever  and  staring  fixedly  through 
the  glass  panels  at  the  beautiful  instrument  which  was  now 
his  property.  When  he  had  it  safely  in  his  room  and  struck 
the  first  notes  on  it,  he  was  filled  with  such  foolish  joy  that 
instead  of  going  on  playing  he  jumped  up  and  with  his  hands 
on  his  hips  gazed  rapturously  at  the  piano  from  a  little 
distance.  The  acoustics  of  the  room  were  excellent  and  they 
had  the  effect  of  quite  dispelling  his  first  slight  discomfort  at 
living  in  a  steel  house.  True,  in  the  room  itself,  despite  the 
external  appearance  of  the  building,  one  could  see  not  the 
slightest  sign  of  steel,  nor  could  one  have  discovered  in 
the  furnishings  even  the  smallest  detail  which  did  not  har¬ 
monize  with  the  comfort  of  the  whole.  At  first  Karl  set  great 
hopes  on  his  piano-playing  and  sometimes  unashamedly 
dreamed,  at  least  before  falling  asleep,  of  the  possibility  that 
it  might  exert  a  direct  influence  upon  his  life  in  America. 
When  he  opened  his  windows  and  the  street  noises  came  in, 
it  certainly  sounded  strange  to  hear  on  the  piano  an  old  army 
song  of  his  native  country  which  soldiers,  sprawling  of  an 
evening  at  barrack  windows  and  gazing  into  the  darkness  of 
some  square  outside,  sang  to  each  other  from  window  to 
window  -  but  the  street,  if  he  looked  down  it  afterwards, 
remained  unchanged,  only  one  small  section  of  a  great  wheel 
which  afforded  no  hand-hold  unless  one  knew  all  the  forces 
controlling  its  full  orbit.  Uncle  Jacob  tolerated  the  piano¬ 
playing  and  said  not  a  word  against  it,  especially  as  Karl 
indulged  very  seldom  in  it;  indeed,  he  actually  brought  Karl 
the  scores  of  some  American  marches,  among  them  the 
national  anthem,  but  pure  love  of  music  could  hardly  explain 
the  fact  that  he  asked  Karl  one  day,  quite  seriously,  whether 
he  would  not  like  to  learn  the  violin  or  the  French  horn 
as  well. 

The  learning  of  English  was  naturally  Karl's  first  and  most 
important  task.  A  young  teacher  from  a  neighbouring  com¬ 
mercial  college  appeared  in  his  room  every  morning  at  seven 
and  found  him  already  over  his  exercise  books  at  the  desk, 

48 


or  walking  up  and  down  the  room  committing  words  to 
memory.  Karl  saw  clearly  that  if  he  were  to  acquire  English 
there  was  no  time  to  be  lost  and  that  this  was  also  his  best 
chance  of  giving  his  uncle  especial  pleasure  by  making  rapid 
progress.  And  indeed,  though  he  had  to  confine  himself  at 
first  to  the  simplest  greetings,  he  was  soon  able  to  carry  on 
in  English  an  increasingly  large  part  of  his  conversation  with 
his  uncle,  whereupon  more  intimate  topics  simultaneously 
came  up  for  discussion.  The  first  American  poem  -  a  descrip¬ 
tion  of  a  fire  -  which  Karl  managed  to  recite  to  his  uncle  one 
evening,  made  that  gentleman  quite  solemn  with  satisfaction. 
They  were  both  standing  at  a  window  in  Karl’s  room.  Uncle 
Jacob  was  looking  out  at  the  sky,  from  which  all  brightness 
had  already  faded,  bringing  his  hands  together  slowly  and 
regularly  in  time  with  the  verses,  while  Karl  stood  erect 
beside  him  and  with  eyes  fixed  on  vacancy  delivered  himself 
of  the  difficult  lines.  * 

The  better  Karl’s  English  became,  the  greater  inclination 

his  uncle  showed  to  introduce  him  to  his  friends,  arranging 

only  that  on  such  occasions  the  English  teacher  should 

always  be  at  his  elbow.  The  first  person  to  whom  Karl  was 

introduced  one  morning  was  a  slender,  incredibly  supple 

young  man,  whom  Uncle  Jacob  brought  into  the  room  with 

a  string  of  fulsome  compliments.  He  was  obviously  one  of 

these  many  millionaires’  sons  who  are  regarded  as  failures  by 

their  parents’  standards  and  who  lead  strenuous  lives  which 

an  ordinary  man  could  scarcely  endure  for  a  single  average 

day  without  breaking  down.  And  as  if  he  knew  or  divined 

this  and  faced  it  as  best  he  could,  there  was  always  about  his 

lips  and  eyes  an  unchanging  smile  of  happiness,  which  seemed 

to  embrace  himself,  anyone  he  was  speaking  to  and  the 

whole  world. 

* 

With  the  unconditional  approval  of  Uncle  Jacob,  it  was 
arranged  that  this  young  man,  whose  name  was  Mr  Mack, 
should  take  Karl  out  riding  every  morning  at  half-past  five, 
either  in  the  riding-school  or  in  the  open  air.  Karl  hesitated 

A.-3 


49 


at  first  before  consenting,  since  he  had  never  sat  on  a  horse 
and  wished  first  to  learn  a  little  about  riding,  but  as  his  uncle 
and  Mack  insisted  so  much,  arguing  that  riding  was  simply  a 
pleasure  and  a  healthy  exercise  and  not  at  all  an  art,  he 
finally  agreed.  Of  course,  that  meant  that  he  had  now  to 
leave  his  bed  at  half -past  four  every  morning,  which  was 
often  a  great  hardship  to  him,  since  he  suffered  from  an 
actual  longing  for  sleep,  probably  in  consequence  of  the 
unremitting  attention  which  he  had  to  exercise  all  day  long; 
but  as  soon  as  he  came  into  his  bathroom  he  ceased  to  be 
sorry  for  himself.  Over  the  full  length  and  breadth  of  the 
bath  stretched  the  spray  -  which  of  his  schoolmates  at  home, 
no  matter  how  rich,  had  anything  equal  to  it  and  for  his  own 
use  alone?  -  and  there  Karl  could  lie  outstretched  —  this 
bath  was  wide  enough  to  let  him  spread  out  his  arms  -  and 
let  the  stream  of  lukewarm,  hot,  and  again  lukewarm  and 
finally  ice-cold  water  pour  over  any  part  of  him  at  pleasure, 
or  over  his  whole  body  at  once.  He  lay  there  as  if  in  a  still 
faintly  surviving  enjoyment  of  sleep  and  loved  to  catch  with 
his  closed  eyelids  the  last  separately  falling  drops  which,  as 
they  broke,  flowed  down  over  his  face. 

At  the  riding-school,  where  his  uncle’s  towering  motor 
car  deposited  him,  the  English  teacher  would  be  already 
waiting,  while  Mack  invariably  arrived  later.  But  Mack 
could  be  late  with  an  easy  mind,  for  the  actual  life  of  the 
riding-school  did  not  begin  until  he  came.  The  horses  started 
out  of  their  semi-slumber  when  he  entered,  the  whips  cracked 
more  loudly  through  the  room,  and  on  the  gallery  running 
round  it  single  figures  suddenly  appeared,  spectators,  grooms, 
riding-pupils,  or  whatever  they  were.  Karl  employed  the 
time  before  Mack’s  arrival  in  practising  riding  a  little,  though 
only  the  most  rudimentary  first  exercises.  There  was  a  tall 
man  who  could  reach  the  backs  of  the  biggest  horses  almost 
without  raising  his  arm,  and  he  invariably  gave  Karl  his 
scanty  quarter-of-an-hour’s  instruction.  The  results  which 
Karl  achieved  were  not  impressive  and  he  learned  by  heart 

50 


many  exclamations  of  pain  in  English,  gasping  them  out  to 
.  his  English  teacher,  who  always  leant  against  the  door, 
usually  in  a  very  sleepy  condition.  But  almost  all  his  dis¬ 
satisfaction  with  riding  ceased  once  Mack  appeared.  The  tall 
man  was  sent  away  and  soon  nothing  could  be  heard  in  the 
hall,  which  was  still  half  in  darkness,  but  the  hoofs  of 
galloping  horses  and  hardly  anything  seen  but  Mack's  up¬ 
lifted  arm,  as  he  signalled  his  orders  to  Karl.  After  half  an 
hour  of  this  pleasure,  fleeting  as  a  dream,  a  halt  was  called. 
Mack  was  then  always  in  a  great  hurry,  said  good-bye  to 
Karl,  patted  him  a  few  times  on  the  cheek  if  he  was  particu¬ 
larly  pleased  with  his  riding  and  vanished,  too  pressed  for 
time  even  to  accompany  Karl  through  the  door.  Then  Karl 
and  the  English  teacher  climbed  into  the  car  and  drove  to 
their  le$son,  generally  round  byways,  for  if  they  had  plunged 
into  the  traffic  of  the  great  street  which  led  directly  from  the 
riding-school  to  his  uncle's  house  it  would  have  meant  too 
great  a  loss  of  time.  In  any  case,  the  English  teacher  soon 
ceased  to  act  as  escort,  since  Karl,  who  blamed  himself  for 
needlessly  forcing  the  tired  man  to  go  with  him  to  the  riding- 
school,  especially  since  the  English  required  in  his  intercourse 
with  Mack  was  very  simple,  begged  his  uncle  to  absolve  the 
man  from  that  duty.  And  after  some  reflection  his  uncle 
acceded  to  his  wish. 

It  took  a  relatively  long  time  before  Uncle  Jacob  would 
consent  to  allow  Karl  even  the  slightest  insight  into  his 
business,  although  Karl  often  begged  him  to  do  so.  It  was  a 
sort  of  commission  and  despatch  agency  such  as,  to  the  best 
of  Karl's  knowledge,  was  probably  not  to  be  found  in  Europe. 
For  the  business  did  not  consist  in  the  transference  of  wares 
from  the  producer  to  the  consumer  or  to  the  dealer,  but  in  the 
handling  of  all  the  necessary  goods  and  raw  materials  going 
to  and  between  the  great  manufacturing  trusts.  It  was  conse¬ 
quently  a  . business  which  embraced  simultaneously  the  pur¬ 
chasing,  storing,  transport  and  sale  of  immense  quantities  of 
goods  and  had  to  maintain  the  most  exact,  unintermittent 


5* 


telephonic  and  telegraphic  communication  with  its  various 
clients.  The  telegraphists'  hall  was  not  smaller  but  larger 
than  the  telegraphic  office  of  Karl’s  native  town,  through 
which  he  had  once  been  shown  by  one  of  his  schoolmates, 
who  was  known  there.  In  the  telephone  hall,  wherever 
one  looked,  the  doors  of  the  telephone  boxes  could  be  seen 
opening  and  shutting,  and  the  noise  was  maddening.  His 
uncle  opened  the  first  of  these  doors  and  in  the  glaring  elec¬ 
tric  light  Karl  saw  an  operator,  quite  oblivious  to  any  sound 
from  the  door,  his  head  bound  in  a  steel  band  which  pressed 
the  receivers  against  his  ears.  His  right  arm  was  lying  on  a 
little  table  as  if  it  were  strangely  heavy  and  only  the  fingers 
holding  the  pencil  kept  twitching  with  inhuman  regularity 
and  speed.  In  the  words  which  he  spoke  into  the  mouthpiece 
he  was  very  sparing  and  often  one  noticed  that  though  he 
had  some  objection  to  raise  or  wished  to  obtain  more  exact 
information,  the  next  phrase  that  he  heard  compelled  him  to 
lower  his  eyes  and  go  on  writing  before  he  could  carry  out 
his  intention.  Besides  he  did  not  need  to  say  anything,  as 
Uncle  Jacob  explained  to  Karl  in  a  subdued  voice,  for  the 
same  conversation  which  this  man  was  taking  down  was 
being  taken  down  at  the  same  time  by  two  other  operators 
and  would  then  be  compared  with  the  other  versions,  so  that 
errors  might  as  far  as  possible  be  eliminated.  At  the  moment 
when  Uncle  Jacob  and  Karl  emerged  from  the  box  a  messen¬ 
ger  slipped  into  it  and  came  out  with  the  notes  which  the 
operator  had  just  written.  Through  the  hall  there  was  a 
perpetual  tumult  of  people  rushing  hither  and  thither. 
Nobody  said  good-day,  greetings  were  omitted,  each  man  fell 
into  step  behind  anyone  who  was  going  the  same  way,  keep¬ 
ing  his  eyes  on  the  floor,  over  which  he  was  set  on  advancing 
as  quickly  as  he  could,  or  giving  a  hurried  glance  at  a  word 
or  figure  here  and  there  on  the  papers  he  held  in  his  hand, 
which  fluttered  with  the  wind  of  his  progress. 

Tou  have  really  gone  far,’  Karl  once  said  on  one  of  these 
journeys  through  the  building,  which  took  several  days  to 

52 


traverse  in  its  entirety,  even  if  one  did  nothing  more  than 
have  a  look  at  each  department. 

‘And  let  me  tell  you  I  started  it  all  myself  thirty  years  ago. 
I  had  a  little  business  at  that  time  near  the  docks  and  if  five 
crates  came  up  for  unloading  in  one  day  I  thought  it  a  great 
day  and  went  home  swelling  with  pride.  Today  my  ware¬ 
houses  cover  the  third  largest  area  in  the  port  and  my  old 
store  is  the  restaurant  and  storeroom  for  my  sixty-fifth  group 
of  porters/ 

‘It's  really  wonderful/  said  Karl. 

‘Developments  in  this  country  are  always  rapid/  said  his 
uncle,  breaking  off  the  conversation. 

One  day  his  uncle  appeared  just  before  dinner,  which  Karl 
had  expected  to  take  alone  as  usual,  and  asked  him  to  put 
on  his  black  suit  at  once  and  join  him  for  dinner,  together 
with  two  of  his  business  friends.  While  Karl  was  changing 
in  the  next  room,  his  uncle  sat  down  at  the  desk  and  looked 
through  the  English  exercise  which  Karl  had  just  finished, 
then  brought  down  his  hand  on  the  desk  and  exclaimed 
aloud :  ‘Really  first  rate  ! 9 

Doubtless  Karl’s  changing  went  all  the  more  smoothly  on 
hearing  these  words  of  praise,  but  in  any  case  he  was  now 
pretty  certain  of  his  English. 

In  his  uncle’s  dining-room,  which  he  could  still  remember 
from  the  evening  of  his  arrival,  two  tall,  stout  gentlemen 
rose  to  their  feet,  one  of  them  called  Green,  the  other 
Pollunder,  as  appeared  during  the  subsequent  conversation. 
For  Uncle  Jacob  hardly  ever  dropped  a  word  about  any  of  his 
acquaintances  and  always  left  it  to  Karl  to  discover  by  his 
own  observation  whatever  was  important  or  interesting 
about  them.  During  the  dinner  itself  only  intimate  business 
matters  were  discussed,  which  meant  for  Karl  an  excellent 
lesson  in  commercial  English,  and  Karl  was  left  silently  to 
occupy  himself  with  his  food,  as  if 'he  were  a  child  who  had 
merely  to  sit  up  straight  and  empty  his  plate;  but  Mr  Green 
leaned  across  to  him  and  asked  him  in  English,  unmistakably 

53 


exerting  himself  to  pronounce  every  word  with  the  utmost 
distinctness,  what  in  general  were  his  first  impressions  of 
America?  With  a  few  side  glances  at  his  uncle,  Karl  replied 
fairly  fully  in  the  dead  silence  that  followed  and  in  his  grati¬ 
tude  and  his  desire  to  please  used  several  characteristic  New 
York  expressions.  At  one  of  his  phrases  all  three  gentlemen 
burst  out  laughing  together  and  Karl  was  afraid  that  he  had 
made  a  gross  mistake;  but  no,  Mr  Pollunder  explained  to  him 
that  he  had  actually  said  something  very  smart.  Mr  Pollunder, 
indeed,  seemed  to  have  taken  a  particular  fancy  to  Karl,  and 
while  Uncle  Jacob  and  Mr  Green  returned  once  more  to  their 
business  consultations  Mr  Pollunder  asked  Karl  to  bring  his 
chair  nearer,  asked  him  countless  questions  about  his  name, 
his  family  and  his  voyage  and  at  last,  to  give  him  a  reprieve, 
began  hastily,  laughing  and  coughing,  to  tell  about  himself 
and  his  daughter,  with  whom  he  lived  in  a  little  country 
house  in  the  neighbourhood  of  New  York,  where,  however, 
he  was  only  able  to  pass  the  evenings,  for  he  was  a  banker 
and  his  profession  kept  him  in  New  York  the  whole  day. 
Karl  was  warmly  invited  to  come  out  to  the  country  house; 
an  American  so  new  and  untried  as  Karl  must  be  in  need  of 
occasional  recuperation  from  New  York.  Karl  at  once  asked 
his  uncle’s  leave  to  accept  the  invitation  and  his  uncle  gave 
it  with  apparent  pleasure,  yet  without  naming  any  stated 
time  or  even  letting  it  come  into  consideration,  as  Karl  and 
Mr  Pollunder  had  expected. 

But  the  very  next  day  Karl  was  summoned  to  one  of  his 
uncle’s  offices  (his  uncle  had  ten  different  offices  in  that 
building  alone),  where  he  found  his  uncle  and  Mr  Pollunder 
reclining  somewhat  monosyllabically  in  two  easy-chairs. 

‘Mr  Pollunder,’  said  Uncle  Jacob,  who  could  scarcely  be 
distinguished  in  the  evening  dusk  of  the  room,  ‘Mr  Pollunder 
has  come  to  take  you  with  him  to  his  country  house,  as  was 
mentioned  yesterday.’ 

‘I  didn’t  know  it  was  to  be  today,’  replied  Karl,  ‘or  else 
I’d  have  got  ready/ 

54 


'If  you're  not  ready,  then  perhaps  we'd  better  postpone  the 
visit  to  some  other  time/  remarked  his  uncle. 

'What  do  you  need  to  get  ready?'  cried  Mr  Pollunder.  'A 
young  man  is  always  ready  for  anything.' 

‘It  isn't  on  his  account/  said  Uncle  Jacob,  turning  to  his 
guest,  ‘but  he  would  have  to  go  up  to  his  room  again,  and 
that  would  delay  you.' 

‘There's  plenty  of  time  for  that/  said  Mr  Pollunder.  ‘I 
allowed  for  a  delay  and  left  my  office  earlier.' 

‘You  see/  said  Uncle  Jacob,  ‘what  a  lot  of  trouble  this  visit 
of  yours  has  caused  already.' 

‘I’m  very  sorry/  said  Karl,  ‘but  I'll  be  back  again  in  a 
minute/  and  he  made  to  rush  away. 

‘Don't  hurry  yourself/  said  Mr  Pollunder,  'you  aren't 
causing  me  the  slightest  trouble;  on  the  contrary,  it's  a 
pleasure  to  have  you  visiting  me.' 

'You’ll  miss  your  riding  lesson  tomorrow.  Have  you  called 
it  off?'  | 

‘No/  said  Karl;  this  visit  to  which  he  had  been  looking 
forward  so  much  was  beginning  to  be  burdensome.  ‘I  didn’t 
know  -' 

‘And  you  mean  to  go  in  spite  of  that?'  asked  his  uncle. 

Mr  Pollunder,  that  kind  man,  came  to  Karl's  help. 

'We'll  stop  at  the  riding-school  on  the  way  and  put 
everything  right.' 

‘There's  something  in  that/  said  Uncle  Jacob.  ‘But  Mack 
will  be  expecting  you.' 

‘He  won't  be  expecting  me/  said  Karl,  ‘but  he'll  turn  up 
anyhow/  . 

‘Well  then?'  said  Uncle  Jacob,  as  if  Karl's  answer  had  not 
been  the  slightest  excuse. 

Once  more  Mr  Pollunder  solved  the  problem :  ‘But  Clara' 
-  she  was  Mr  Pollunder’s  daughter  -  ‘expects  him  too,  and 
this  very  evening,  and  surely  she*  has  the  preference  over 
Mack?' 

Certainly/  said  Uncle  Jacob.  'Well  then,  run  away  to 

I  .  55 


your  room/  and  as  if  involuntarily,  he  drummed  on  the  arm 
of  his  chair  several  times.  Karl  was  already  at  the  door  when 
his  uncle  detained  him  once  more  with  the  question:  ‘Of 
course  you'll  be  back  here  again  tomorrow  morning  for  your 
English  lesson?' 

‘But  my  dear  sir ! '  cried  Mr  Pollunder,  turning  round  in 
his  chair  with  astonishment,  as  far  as  his  stoutness  would 
permit  him.  ‘Can't  he  stay  with  us  at  least  over  tomorrow? 
Couldn't  I  bring  him  back  early  in  the  morning  the  day 
after?' 

‘That's  quite  out  of  the  question,'  retorted  Uncle  Jacob. 
‘I  can’t  have  his  studies  broken  up  like  this.  Later  on,  when 
he  has  taken  up  a  regular  profession  of  some  kind,  I’ll  be 
very  glad  to  let  him  accept  such  a  kind  and  flattering  invita¬ 
tion  even  for  a  long  time.' 

‘What  a  contradiction  ! '  thought  Karl. 

Mr  Pollunder  looked  quite  melancholy.  ‘But  for  one 
evening  and  one  night  it’s  really  hardly  worth  while.' 

‘That's  what  I  think  too,'  said  Uncle  Jacob. 

‘One  must  take  what  one  can  get,’  said  Mr  Pollunder,  and 
now  he  was  laughing  again.  ‘All  right,  I'll  wait  for  you,’  he 
shouted  to  Karl,  who,  since  his  uncle  said  nothing  more,  was 
hurrying  away. 

When  he  returned  in  a  little  while,  ready  for  the  journey, 
he  found  only  Mr  Pollunder  in  the  office;  his  uncle  had  gone. 
Mr  Pollunder  shook  Karl  quite  gaily  by  both  hands,  as  if  he 
wished  to  assure  himself  as  strongly  as  possible  that  Karl 
was  coming  after  all.  Karl,  still  flushed  with  haste,  for  his  part 
wrung  Mr  Pollunder’s  hands  in  return;  he  was  elated  at  the 
thought  of  the  visit. 

‘My  uncle  wasn’t  annoyed  at  my  going?' 

‘Not  at  all !  He  didn't  mean  all  that  very  seriously.  He  has 

your  education  so  much  at  heart.’ 

‘Did  he  tell  you  himself  that  he  didn't  mean  it  seriously?' 

‘Oh  yes/  said  Mr  Pollunder,  drawling  the  words,  and  thus 
proving  that  he  could  not  tell  a  lie. 

56 


It's  strange  how  unwilling  he  was  to  give  me  leave  to 
visit  you,  although  you  are  a  friend  of  his/ 

Mr  Pollunder  too,  although  he  did  not  admit  it,  could  find 
no  explanation  for  the  problem,  and  both  of  them,  as  they 
drove  through  the  warm  evening  in  Mr  Pollunder’s  car,  kept 
turning  it  over  in  their  minds  for  a  long  time,  although  they 
spoke  of  other  things. 

They  sat  close  together  and  Mr  Pollunder  held  KarPs  hand 
in  his  while  he  talked.  Karl  was  eager  to  hear  as  much  as  he 
could  about  Miss  Clara,  as  if  his  impatience  with  the  long 
journey  could  he  assuaged  by  listening  to  stories  that  made 
the  time  appear  shorter.  He  had  never  driven  through  the 
streets  of  New  York  in  the  evening,  but  though  the  pave¬ 
ments  and  roadways  were  thronged  with  traffic  changing  its 
direction  every  minute,  as  if  caught  up  in  a  whirlwind  and 
roaring  like  some  strange  element  quite  unconnected  with 
humanity,  Karl,  as  he  strained  his  attention  to  catch  Mr 
Pollunder’s  words,  had  no  eye  for  anything  but  Mr  Pollun¬ 
der’s  dark  waistcoat,  which  was  peacefully  spanned  by  a  gold 
chain.  Out  of  the  central  streets  where  the  theatre-goers, 
urged  by  extreme  and  unconcealed  fear  of  being  late,  hurried 
along  with  flying  steps  or  drove  in  vehicles  at  the  utmost 
possible  speed,  they  came  by  intermediate  stages  to  the  sub¬ 
urbs,  where  their  car  was  repeatedly  diverted  by  mounted 
police  .into  side  alleys,  as  the  main  roadway  was  occupied 
by  a  demonstration  of  metal-workers  on  strike  and  only  the 
most  necessary  traffic  could  be  permitted  to  use  the  cross¬ 
roads.  When  the  car,  emerging  out  of  dark,  dully  echoing 
narrow  lanes,  crossed  one  of  these  great  thoroughfares  which 
were  as  wide  as  squares,  there  opened  out  on  both  sides  an 
endless  perspective  of  pavements  filled  with  a  moving  mass 
of  people,  slowly  shuffling  forward,  whose  singing  was  more 
homogeneous  than  any  single  human  voice.  But  in  the  road¬ 
way,  which  was  kept  free,  mounted  policemen  could  be  seen 
here  and  there  sitting  on  motionless  horses,  or  banner-bearers, 
or  inscribed  streamers  stretching  across  the  street,  or  a  labour 

B  *  57 


leader  surrounded  by  colleagues  and  stewards,  or  an  electric 
tram  which  had  not  escaped  quickly  enough  and  now  stood 
dark  and  empty  while  the  driver  and  the  conductor  lounged 
on  the  platform.  Small  groups  of  curious  spectators  stood 
at  a  distance  watching  the  actual  demonstrators,  rooted  to 
their  places  although  they  had  no  clear  idea  of  what  was 
really  happening.  But  Karl  merely  leaned  back  happily  on 
the  arm  which  Mr  Pollunder  had  put  round  him;  the  know¬ 
ledge  that  he  would  soon  be  a  welcome  guest  in  a  well-lighted 
country  house  surrounded  by  high  walls  and  guarded  by 
watch-dogs  filled  him  with  extravagant  well-being,  and 
although  he  was  now  beginning  to  feel  sleepy  and  could  no 
longer  catch  perfectly  all  that  Mr  Pollunder  was  saying,  or 
at  least  only  intermittently,  he  pulled  himself  together  from 
time  to  time  and  rubbed  his  eyes  to  discover  whether  Mr 
Pollunder  had  noticed  his  drowsiness,  for  that  was  something 
he  wished  to  avoid  at  any  price. 


3.  A  Country  House  near  New  York 


'Well,  here  we  are/  said  Mr  Pollunder  in  one  of  Karl's  most 
absent  moments;  The  car  was  standing  before  a  house  which, 
like  the  country  houses  of  most  rich  people  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  New  York,  was  larger  and  taller  than  a  country 
house  designed  for  only  one  family  has  any  need  to  be.  Since 
there  were  no  lights  except  in  the  lower  part  of  the  house, 
it  was  quite  impossible  to  estimate  how  high  the  building 
was.  In  front  of  it  rustled  chestnut  trees  and  between  them  - 
the  gate  was  already  open  -  a  short  path  led  to  the  front¬ 
door  steps.  Karl  felt  so  tired  on  getting  out  that  he  began  to 
suspect  the  journey  must  have  been  fairly  long  after  all.  In 
the  darkness  of  the  chestnut  avenue  he  heard  a  girl’s  voice 
saying  beside  him :  ‘So  this  is  Mr  Jacob  at  last/ 

‘My  name  is  Rossmann/  said  Karl,  taking  the  hand  held 
out  to  him  by  a  girl  whose  silhouette  he  could  now  perceive. 

‘He  is  only  Jacob’s  nephew/  said  Mr  Pollunder  in  explan¬ 
ation,  ‘his  own  name  is  Karl  Rossmann/ 

‘That  doesn’t  make  us  any  the  less  glad  to  see  him/  said 
the  girl,  who  did  not  bother  much  about  names. 

All  the  same  Karl  insisted  on  asking,  while  he  walked 
towards  the  house  between  Mr  Pollunder  and  the  girl :  ‘Are 
you  Miss  Clara?’ 

‘Yes/  she  said,  and  now  a  little  light  from  the  house  picked 
out  her  face,  which  was  inclined  towards  him,  ‘but  I  didn’t 
want  to  introduce  myself. here  in  the  darkness/ 

‘Why,  has  she  been  waiting  for  us  at  the  gate?’  thought 
Karl,  gradually  wakening  up  as  he  walked  along. 


59 


‘By  the  way,  we  have  another  guest  this  evening/  said 
Clara. 

‘Impossible  !  ’  cried  Pollunder  irritably. 

‘Mr  Green/  said  Clara. 

‘When  did  he  come?’  asked  Karl,  as  if  seized  by  a  pre¬ 
monition. 

‘Just  a  minute  ago.  Didn’t  you  hear  his  car  in  front  of 
yours?’ 

Karl  looked  up  at  Mr  Pollunder  to  discover  what  he 
thought  of  the  situation,  but  his  hands  were  thrust  into  his 
trouser  pockets  and  he  merely  stamped  his  feet  a  little  on 
the  path. 

‘It’s  no  good  living  just  outside  New  York;  it  doesn’t  save 
you  from  being  disturbed.  We’ll  simply  have  to  get  a  house 
farther  away;  even  if  I  have  to  spend  half  the  night  driving 
before  I  get  home/ 

They  remained  standing  by  the  steps. 

‘But  it’s  a  long  time  since  Mr  Green  was  here  last/  said 
Clara,  who  obviously  agreed  with  her  father  yet  wanted  to 
soothe  him  and  take  him  out  of  himself. 

‘Why  should  he  come  just  this  evening?’  said  Pollunder, 
and  the  words  rolled  furiously  over  his  sagging  lower  lip, 
which  like  all  loose,  heavy  flesh  was  easily  agitated. 

‘Why  indeed  !  ’  said  Clara. 

‘Perhaps  he’ll  soon  go  away  again/  remarked  Karl  himself 
astonished  at  the  sympathy  uniting  him  to  these  people  who 
had  been  complete  strangers  to  him  a  day  ago. 

‘Oh  no/  said  Clara,  ‘he  has  some  great  business  or  other 
with  Papa  which  will  probably  take  a  long  time  to  settle,  for 
he  has  already  threatened  me  in  fun  that  I’ll  have  to  sit  up 
till  morning  if  I’m  going  to  play  the  polite  hostess.’ 

‘That’s  the  last  straw.  So  he’s  going  to  stay  all  night!’ 
cried  Pollunder,  as  if  nothing  could  be  worse.  ‘I  really  feel 
half  inclined/  he  said,  and  the  idea  restored  some  of  his  good 
humour,  ‘I  really  feel  half  inclined  Mr  Rossmann,  to  put  you 
in  the  car  again  and  drive  you  straight  back  to  your  uncle. 

60 


This  evening’s  spoilt  beforehand,  and  who  knows  when 
your  uncle  will  trust  you  here  again.  But  if  I  bring  you  back 
tonight  he  won’t  be  able  to  refuse  us  your  company  next 
time.’ 

And  he  took  hold  of  Karl’s  hand,  to  carry  out  his  plan  on 
the  instant.  But  Karl  made  no  move  and  Clara  begged  her 
father  to  let  him  stay,  since  she  and  Karl  at  least  need  not 
let  Mr  Green  disturb  them  at  all,  and  finally  Pollunder  him¬ 
self  grew  aware  that  his  resolution  was  not  of  the  firmest. 
Besides  -  and  that  was  perhaps  the  decisive  thing  -  they 
suddenly  heard  Mr  Green  shouting  from  the  top  of  the  steps 
down  into  the  garden :  ‘Where  on  earth  are  you?’ 

‘Coming,’  said  Pollunder  and  he  began  to  climb  the  steps. 
Behind  him  came  Karl  and  Clara,  who  now  studied  each 
other  in  the  light. 

‘What  red  Bps  she  has,'  Karl  said  to  himself,  and  he 
thought  of  Mr  Pollunder’s  lips  and  how  beautifully  they 
had  been  metamorphosed  in  his  daughter. 

‘After  dinner,’  she  said,  ‘we’ll  go  straight  to  my  room,  if 
you  would  like  that,  so  that  we  at  least  can  be  rid  of  Mr 
Green,  even  if  Papa  has  to  put  up  with  him.  And  then  per¬ 
haps  you’ll  be  so  kind  as  to  play  the  piano  for  me,  for  Papa 
has  told  me  how  well  you  can  play;  I’m  sorry  to  say  I’m  quite 
incapable  of  practising  and  never  touch  my  piano,  much  as 
I  really  love  music.’ 

Karl  was  quite  prepared  to  fall  in  with  Clara’s  suggestion, 
though  he  would  have  liked  to  have  Mr  Pollunder  join 
them  as  well.  But  the  sight  of  Green’s  gigantic  figure  -  he 
had  already  got  used  to  Pollunder’s  bulk  -  which  gradually 
loomed  above  them  as  they  climbed  the  steps,  dispelled  all 
Karl’s  hopes  of  luring  Mr  Pollunder  away  from  the  man  that 
evening. 

Mr  Green  hailed  them  in  a  great  hurry,  as  if  much  time 
had  already  been  lost,  took  Mr  Pollunder’s  arm,  and  pushed 
Karl  and  Clara  before  him  into  the  dining-room  which, 
chiefly  because  of  the  flowers  on  the  table  rising  from  sprays 

61 


of  green  foliage,  looked  very  festive  and  so  made  the  presence 
of  the  importunate  Mr  Green  doubly  regrettable.  Karl  was 
just  consoling  himself,  as  he  waited  beside  the  table  until  the 
others  were  seated,  with  the  thought  that  the  great  glass 
doors  leading  to  the  garden  would  remain  open,  for  a  strong 
fragrance  was  wafted  in  as  if  one  sat  in  an  arbour,  when  Mr 
Green  snorted  and  rushed  to  close  these  very  glass  doors, 
bending  down  to  the  bolts  at  the  bottom,  stretching  up  to  the 
ones  at  the  top,  and  all  with  such  youthful  agility  that  the 
servant,  when  he  hurried  across,  found  nothing  left  to  do. 
Mr  Green's  first  words  when  he  returned  to  the  table  expres¬ 
sed  his  astonishment  that  Karl  had  obtained  his  uncle’s  per¬ 
mission  to  make  this  visit.  He  raised  one  spoonful  of  soup 
after  another  to  his  mouth  and  explained  to  Clara  on  his 
right  and  to  Mr  Pollunder  on  his  left  why  he  was  so  aston¬ 
ished,  and  how  solicitously  Uncle  Jacob  watched  over  Karl, 
so  that  his  affection  for  Karl  was  too  great  to  be  called  the 
mere  affection  of  an  uncle. 

'Not  content  with  his  uncalled-for  interference  here,  he 
insists  on  interfering  between  me  and  my  uncle,  too,’  thought 
Karl,  and  he  could  not  swallow  a  drop  of  the  golden-coloured 
soup.  But  then,  not  wishing  to  show  how  upset  he  felt,  he 
began  silently  to  pour  the  soup  down  his  throat.  The  meal 
went  on  with  torturing  slowness.  Mr  Green  alone,  assisted 
by  Clara,  showed  any  liveliness  and  found  occasion  for  a 
short  burst  of  laughter  now  and  then.  Mr  Pollunder  let  him¬ 
self  be  drawn  into  the  conversation  once  or  twice,  when  Mr 
Green  started  to  talk  about  business.  But  he  soon  withdrew 
even  from  such  discussions  and  Mr  Green  had  to  surprise 
him  into  speech  by  bringing  them  up  again  unexpectedly. 
Moreover,  Mr  Green  kept  insisting  on  the  fact  (and  at  this 
point  Karl,  who  was  listening  as  intently  as  if  something 
were  threatening  him,  had  to  be  told  by  Clara  that  the  roast 
was  at  his  elbow  and  that  he  was  at  a  dinner  party)  that  he 
had  had  no  intention  beforehand  of  paying  this  unexpected 
visit.  For  though  the  business  he  came  to  discuss  was  of 

62  ’  SM 


special  urgency,  yet  the  most  important  part  of  it  at  least 
could  have  been  settled  in  town  that  day,  leaving  the  minor 
details  to  be  tackled  next  day  or  later.  And  so,  long  before 
closing  hours,  he  had  actually  called  at  Mr  Pollunder’s  office, 
but  had  not  found  him  there,  and  so  he  had  had  to  telephone 
home  that  he  would  not  be  back  that  night  and  to  drive  out 
here. 

Then  I  must  ask  your  pardon/  said  Karl  loudly,  before 
anyone  else  had  time  to  answer,  'for  I  am  to  blame  that  Mr 
Pollunder  left  his  office  early  today,  and  I  am  very  sorry/ 
Mr  Pollunder  tried  to  cover  his  face  with  his  table  napkin, 
while  Clara,  though  she  smiled  at  Karl,  smiled  less  out  of 
sympathy  than  out  of  a  desire  to  influence  him  in  some  way. 

'No  apology  is  required/  said  Mr  Green,  carving  a  pigeon 
with  incisive  strokes  of  the  knife,  'quite  the  contrary,  I  am 
delighted  to  pass  the  evening  in  such  pleasant  company 
instead  of  dining  alone  at  home,  where  I  have  only  an  old 
housekeeper  to  wait  on  me,  and  she's  so  old  that  it's  as 
much  as  she  can  do  to  get  from  the  door  to  the  table,  and  I 
can  lean  right  back  in  my  chair  for  minutes  at  a  time  to 
watch  her  making  the  journey.  It  wasn’t  until  recently  that 
I  managed  to  persuade  her  to  let  my  man  carry  the  dishes  as 
far  as  the  door  of  the  dining-room;  but  the  journey  from  the 
door  to  the  table  is  her  perquisite,  so  far  as  I  can  make  out/ 
'Heavens/  cried  Clara,  'what  fidelity ! 9 
'Yes,  there’s  still  fidelity  in  the  world/  said  Mr  Green, 
putting  a  slice  of  pigeon  into  his  mouth,  where  his  tongue, 
as  Karl  chanced  to  notice,  took  it  in  charge  with  a  flourish. 
Karl  felt  nearly  sick  and  got  up.  Almost  simultaneously  Mr 
Pollunder  and  Clara  caught  him  by  the  hands. 

‘It’s  not  time  to  get  up  yet/  said  Clara.  And  when  he  had 
sat  down  again  she  whispered  to  him :  'We’ll  escape  together 
in  a'little  while.  Have  patience/ 

Meanwhile,  Mr  Green  had  calmly  gone  on  eating,  as  if 
it  were  Mr  Pollunder’s  and  Clara’s  natural  duty  to  comfort 
Karl  after  he  had  made  him  sick. 


63 


The  dinner  was  lingered  out  particularly  by  the  exhaus¬ 
tiveness  with  which  Mr  Green  dissected  each  course,  which 
did  not  keep  him  however  from  attacking  each  new  course 
with  fresh  energy;  it  really  looked  as  if  he  were  resolved 
radically  to  recuperate  from  the  offices  of  his  old  housekeeper. 
Now  and  again  he  bestowed  praise  on  Miss  Clara’s  expertness 
in  housekeeping,  which  visibly  flattered  her,  while  Karl  on 
the  contrary  felt  tempted  to  ward  it  off,  as  if  it  were  an 
assault.  Mr  Green,  however,  was  not  content  with  attack¬ 
ing  Clara,  but  deplored  frequently,  without  looking  up  from 
his  plate,  Karl’s  extraordinary  lack  of  appetite.  Mr  Pollunder 
defended  Karl’s  lack  of  appetite,  although  as  the  host  he 
should  have  encouraged  him  to  eat.  And  because  of  the  con¬ 
straint  under  which  he  had  suffered  during  the  whole  din¬ 
ner,  Karl  grew  so  touchy  that  against  his  better  knowledge 
he  actually  construed  Mr  Pollunder’s  words  as  an  unkind¬ 
ness.  And  it  was  another  symptom  of  his  condition  that  all 
at  once  he  would  eat  far  too  much  with  indecorous  speed, 
only  to  sit  drooping  for  a  long  time  afterwards,  letting  his 
knife  and  fork  rest  on  the  table,  quite  silent  and  motionless, 
so  that  the  man  who  served  the  dishes  often  did  not  know 
what  to  do  with  them. 

Til  have  to  tell  your  uncle  the  Senator  tomorrow  how  you 
offended  Miss  Clara  by  not  eating  your  dinner,’  said  Mr 
Green,  and  he  betrayed  the  facetious  intention  of  his  words 
only  by  the  way  in  which  he  plied  his  knife  and  fork. 

‘just  look  at  the  girl,  how  downcast  she  is,’  he  went  on, 
chucking  Clara  under  the  chin.  She  let  him  do  it  and  closed 
her  eyes. 

'Poor  little  thing !  ’  he  cried,  leaning  back,  purple  in  the 
face,  and  laughing  with  the  vigour  of  a  full-fed  man.  Karl 
vainly  sought  to  account  for  Mr  Pollunder’s  behaviour.  He 
was  sitting  looking  at  his  plate,  as  if  the  really  important 
event  were  happening  there.  He  did  not  pull  Karl’s  chair 
closer  to  him  and,  when  he  did  speak,  he  spoke  to  the  whole 
table,  while  to  Karl  he  had  nothing  particular  to  say.  On  the 

64 


other  hand  he  suffered  Green,  that  disreputable  old  New 
York  roue  deliberately  to  fondle  Clara,  to  insult  himself, 
Karl,  Pollunder’s  guest,  or  at  least  to  treat  him  like  a  child, 
and  to  go  on  from  strength  to  strength,  working  himself 
up  to  who  knew  what  dreadful  deeds. 

After  rising  from  the  table  -  when  Green  noticed  the 
general  intention  he  was  the  first  to  get  up  and  as  it  were 
drew  all  the  others  with  him  -  Karl  turned  aside  to  one  of 
the  great  windows  set  in  narrow  white  sashes  which  opened 
on  to  the  terrace,  and  which  in  fact,  as  he  saw  on  going 
nearer,  were  really  doors.  What  had  become  of  the  dislike 
which  Mr  Pollunder  and  his  daughter  had  felt  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  for  Green,  and  which  had  seemed  at  that  time  some¬ 
what  incomprehensible  to  Karl?  Now  they  were  standing 
side  by  side  with  the  man  and  nodding  at  him.  The  smoke 

'  from  Mr  Green’s  cigar,  a  present  from  Pollunder  -  a  cigar 
of  a  thickness  which  Karl’s  father  in  Austria  had  some¬ 
times  mentioned  as  an  actual  fact  but  had  probably  never 
seen  with  his  own  eyes  -  spread  through  the  room  and  bore 
Green’s  influence  even  into  nooks  and  corners  where  he 
would  never  set  -foot  in  person.  Far  off  as  he  was,  Karl  could 
feel  his  nose  prickling  with  the  smoke,  and  Mr  Green's  de¬ 
meanour,  wliich  he  merely  glanced  at  from  the  window  with 
a  hasty  turn  of  the  head,  seemed  infamous  to  him.  He  began 
to  think  it  not  at  all  inconceivable  that  his  uncle  had  demur¬ 
red  for  so  long  against  giving  permission  for  this  visit  simply 
because  he  knew  Mr  Poliunder’s  weak  character  and  accord¬ 
ingly  envisaged  as  a  possibility,  even  if1  he  did  not  exactly 
foresee,  that  Karl  might  be  exposed  to  insult.  As  for  the 
American  girl,  Karl  did  not  like  her  either,  although  she  was 
very  nearly  as  beautiful  as  he  had  pictured  her.  Ever  since  Mr 
Green’s  gallantries  began  he  had  been  actually  surprised  by 
the' beauty  of  which  her  face  was  capable,  and  especially  by 
the  brilliance  of  her  lively  eyes.  A  dress  which  fitted  so  closely 
to  its  wearer’s  body  he  had  never  seen  before;  small  wrinkles 
in  the  soft,  closely-woven,  yellowish  material,  betrayed  the 

k  65 


force  of  the  tension.  And  yet  Karl  cared  nothing  for  her  and 
would  gladly  have  given  up  all  thought  of  going  to  her  room, 
if  instead  he  could  only  open  the  door  beside  him  -  and  he 
had  laid  his  hands  on  the  latch  just  in  case  -  and  climb  into 
the  car  or,  if  the  chauffeur  were  already  asleep,  walk  by  him¬ 
self  back  to  New  York.  The  clear  night  with  its  benevolent 
full  moon  was  free  to  everyone  and  to  be  afraid  of  anything 
out  there,  in  the  open,  seemed  senseless  to  Karl.  He  pictured 
to  himself  -  and  for  the  first  time  he  began  to  feel  happy  in 
that  room  -  how  in  the  morning  -  he  could  hardly  get  back 
on  foot  sooner  than  that  -  he  would  surprise  his  uncle.  True, 
he  had  never  yet  been  in  his  uncle's  bedroom,  nor  did  he 
even  know  where  it  was,  but  he  would  soon  find  that  out. 
Then  he  would  knock  at  the  door  and  at  the  formal  'come 
in'  rush  into  the  room  and  surprise  his  dear  uncle,  whom 
until  now  he  had  known  only  fully  dressed  and  buttoned  to 
the  chin,  sitting  up  in  bed  in  his  nightshirt,  his  astonished 
eyes  fixed  on  the  door.  In  itself  that  might  not  perhaps  be 
very  much,  but  one  had  only  to  consider  what  consequences 
it  might  lead  to.  Perhaps  he  might  breakfast  with  his  uncle 
for  the  first  time,  his  uncle  in  bed,  he  himself  sitting  on  a 
chair,  the  breakfast  on  a  little  table  between  them;  perhaps 
that  breakfast  together  would  become  a  standing  arrange¬ 
ment;  perhaps  as  a  result  of  such  informal  breakfasting,  as 
was  almost  inevitable,  they  would  meet  oftener  than  simply 
once  a  day  and  so  of  course  be  able  to  speak  more  frankly 
to  each  other.  After  all,  it  was  merely  the  lack  of  a  frank 
interchange  of  confidences  that  had  made  him  a  little  refrac¬ 
tory/or  better  still,  mulish,  towards  his  uncle  today.  And 
even  if  he  had  to  spend  the  night  here  on  this  occasion  - 
and  unfortunately  it  looked  very  like  that,  although  they 
left  him  to  stand  by  the  window  and  amuse  himself  - 
perhaps  this  unlucky  visit  would  become  the  turning- 
point  in  his  relations  with  his  uncle;  perhaps  his  uncle 
was  lying  in  bed  and  thinking  the  very  same  things  at  that 
moment. 

66 


A  little  comforted,  he  turned  round.  Clara  was  standing 
beside  him  saying:  ‘Don’t  you  like  being  with  us  at  all? 
Won’t  you  try  to  make  yourself  a  little  more  at  home  here? 
Come  on,  I’ll  make  a  last  attempt.’ 

She  led  him  across  the  room  towards  the  door.  At  a  side 
table  the  two  gentlemen  were  sitting,  drinking  out  of  tall 
glasses  a  light  effervescent  liquid  which  was  unknown  to 
Karl  and  which  he  would  have  liked  to  taste.  Mr  Green  had 
his  elbows  on  the  table  and  his  face  was  pushed  as  close  to 
Mr  Pollunder  as  he  could  get  it;  if  one  had\not  known  Mr 
Pollunder,  one  might  quite  easily  have  suspected  that  some 
criminal  plan  was  being  discussed  here  and  no  legitimate 
business.  While  Mr  Pollunder’s  eyes  followed  Karl  to  the 
door  with  a  friendly  look,  Mr  Green,  though  as  a  rule  one’s 
eyes  involuntarily  follow  those  of  the  man  one  is  talking  to, 
did  not  once  glance  round  at  Karl;  and  it  seemed  to  Karl  that 
in  behaving  like  this  Green  was  pointing  his  conviction  that 
each  of  them,  Karl  on  his  part  and  Green  on  his,  must  fight 
for  his  own  hand  and  that  any  obligatory  social  connexion 
between  them  would  be  determined  in  time  by  the  victory 
or  destruction  of  one  of  them. 

‘If  that’s  what  he  thinks,’  Karl  told  himself,  ‘he's  a  fool. 
I  really  don’t  want  anything  from  him  and  he  should  leave 
me  in  peace.’ 

Hardly  had  he  set  foot  in  the  corridor  when  it  occurred 
to  him  that  he  had  probably  been  discourteous,  for  his  eyes 
had  been  so  firmly  fixed  on  Green  that  Clara  had  had  almost 
to  drag  him  from  the  room.  He  went  all*  the  more  willingly 
with  her  ijow.  As  they  passed  along  the  corridors  he  could 
scarcely  credit  his  eyes  at  first,  when  at  every  twenty  paces 
he  saw  a  servant  in  rich  livery  holding  a  huge  candelabrum 
with  a  shaft  so  thick  that  both  the  man’s  hands  were  re¬ 
quired  to  grasp  it. 

‘The  new  electric  wiring  has  been  laid  on  only  in  the 
dining-room  so  far,’ explained  Clara. ‘We’ve  just  newly  bought 
this  house  and  we’re  having  it  completely  reconstructed,  that 

67 


is  so  far  as  an  old  house  with  all  its  odd  peculiarities  can  be 
reconstructed.’ 

’So  you  have  actually  old  houses  in  America  too/  said 
Karl. 

’Of  course/  said  Clara  with  a  laugh,  pulling  him  along. 
’You  have  some  queer  ideas  about  America/ 

’You  shouldn’t  laugh  at  me/  he  said  in  vexation.  After 
all  he  knew  both  Europe  and  America,  while  she  knew  only 
America. 

In  passing,  Clara  flung  a  door  open  with  a  light  push  of 
her  hand  and  said  without  stopping:  ‘That’s  where  you’re 
going  to  sleep/ 

Karl  of  course  wanted  to  look  at  the  room  straight  away, 
but  Clara  exclaimed  with  impatience,  raising  her  voice 
almost  to  shouting  pitch,  that  there  was  plenty  of  time  for 
that  later  and  that  he  must  come  with  her  first.  They  had  a 
kind  of  tug-of-war  in  the  corridor  until  it  came  into  Karl’s 
mind  that  he  need  not  do  everything  Clara  told  him,  and 
he  wrested  himself  free  and  stepped  into  the  room.  The  sur¬ 
prising  darkness  outside  the  window  was  explained  by  the 
spreading  branches  of  a  large  tree  swaying  there.  He  could 
hear  the  twitter  of  birds.  To  be  sure,  in  the  room  itself,  which 
the  moonlight  had  not  yet  reached,  one  could  distinguish 
hardly  anything.  Karl  felt  sorry  that  he  had  not  brought  the 
electric  torch  which  his  uncle  had  given  him.  In  this  house 
an  electric  torch  was  absolutely  indispensable;  given  a  couple 
of  torches,  the  servants  could  have  been  sent  to  their  beds. 
He  sat  down  on  the  window-ledge  and  stared  out  into  the 
darkness,  listening.  A  bird  which  he  had  disturbed  seemed 
to  be  fluttering  through  the  leafage  of  the  old  tree.  The 
whistle  of  a  suburban  train  sounded  somewhere  across  the 
fields.  Otherwise  all  was  still. 

But  not  for  long,  for  Clara  came  rushing  in.  Visibly  furious, 
she  cried:  ’What’s  the  meaning  of  this?’  and  beat  her  hand 
against  her  skirt.  Karl  decided  not  to  answer  her  until  she 
should  show  more  politeness.  But  she  advanced  upon  him 

68 


with  long  strides,  exclaiming:  'Well,  are  you  coming  with 
me  or  are  you  not?'  and  either  intentionally  or  in  sheer  agi¬ 
tation  struck  him  so  hard  on  the  chest  that  he  would  have 
fallen  out  of  the  window  if  at  the  very  last  minute  he  had  not 
launched  himself  from  the  window-ledge  so  that  his  feet 
touched  the  floor. 

‘I  might  have  fallen  out  of  the  window/  he  said  reproach¬ 
fully.  -  ' 

'It’s  a  pity  you  didn’t.  Why  are  you  so  uncivil?  I’ll  push 
you  right  out  next  time.’ 

And  she  actually  seized  him  and  carried  him  in  her  athletic 
arms  almost  as  far  as  the  window,  since  he  was  too  sur¬ 
prised  to  remember  to  brace  himself.  But  then  he  came  to  his 
senses,  freed  himself  with  a  twist  of  the  hips  and  caught 
hold  of  her  instead. 

‘Oh,  you’re  hurting  me  !  ’  she  said  at  once. 

But  now  Karl  felt  that  it  was  not  safe  to  let  her  go.  He 
gave  her  freedom  to  take  any  steps  she  liked,  but  followed 
her  close,  keeping  hold  of  her.  It  was  easy  enough  to  grip 
her  in  her  tight  dress. 

‘Let  me  go,’  she  whispered,  her  flushed  face  so  close  to 
his  that  he  had  to  strain  to  see  her.  ‘Let  me  go;  I’ll  give  you 
something  you  don’t  expect.’  -  ‘Why  is  she  sighing  like 
that?’  thought  Karl.  'It  can’t  hurt  her,  I’m  not  squeezing 
her/  and  he  still  did  not  let  her  go.  But  suddenly,  after  a 
moment  of  unguarded,  silent  immobility,  he  again  felt  her 
strength  straining  against  his  body  and  she  had  broken 
away  from  him,  locked  him  in  a  well-applied  wrestling  hold, 
knocked  his  legs  from  under  him  by  some  foot-work  in  a 
technique  strange  to  him  and  thrust  him  before  her  with 
amazing  control,  panting  a  little,  to  the  wall.  But  there  was 
a  sofa  by  the  wall  on  which  she  laid  him  down,  keeping  at  a 
safe  ’distance  from  him,  and  said :  ‘Now  move  if  you  can.’ 

‘Cat,  wild  gat !’  was  all  that  Karl  could  shout  in  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  rage  and  shame  which  he  felt  within  him.  'You 
must  be  crazy,  you  wild  cat !  ’ 


69 


Take  care  what  you  say,’  she  said  and  she  slipped  one 
hand  to  his  throat,  on  which  she  began  to  press  so  strongly 
that  Karl  could  only  gasp  for  breath,  while  she  swung  the 
other  fist  against  his  cheek,  touching  it  as  if  experimentally, 
and  then  again  and  again  drew  it  back,  farther  and  farther, 
ready  to  give  him  a  buffet  at  any  moment. 

'What  would  you  say/  she  asked,  'if  I  punished  you  for 
your  rudeness  to  a  lady  by  sending  you  home  with  your 
ears  well  boxed?  It  might  do  you  good  for  the  rest  of  your 
life,  although  you  wouldn't  care  to  remember  it.  I'm  really 
sorry  about  you,  you’re  a  passably  good-looking  boy,  and  if 
you'd  learned  ju-jutsu  you'd  probably  have  beaten  me.  All 
the  same,  all  the  same  -  I  feel  enormously  tempted  to  box 
your  ears  for  you  now  that  you're  lying  there.  I’d  probably 
regret  it;  but  if  I  should  do  it,  let  me  tell  you  that  it'll  be 
because  I  can’t  help  it.  And  of  course  it  won't  be  only  one 
box  on  the  ear  I’ll  give  you,  but  I’ll  let  fly  right  and  left  till 
you’re  black  and  blue.  And  perhaps  you’re  one  of  these  men 
of  honour  -  I  could  easily  believe  it  -  and  couldn’t  survive 
the  disgrace  of  having  your  ears  boxed,  and  would  have  to 
do  away  with  yourself.  But  why  were  you  so  horrid  to  me? 
Don't  you  like  me  ?  Isn’t  it  worth  while  to  come  to  my  room  ? 
Ah,  look  out !  I  very  nearly  let  fly  at  you  by  accident  just 
now.  And  if  I  let  you  off  tonight,  see  that  you  behave  better 
next  time.  I’m  not  your  uncle  to  put  up  with  your  tantrums. 
Anyhow,  let  me  point  out  that  if  I  let  you  off  now,  you 
needn’t  think  that  the  disgrace  is  all  the  same  whether  your 
ears  are  boxed  or  not.  I’d  rather  box  your  ears  soundly  for  you 
than  have  you  thinking  that.  I  wonder  what  Mack  will  say 
when  I  tell  him  about  all  this?' 

At  the  thought  of  Mack  she  loosened  her  grip;  in  his 
muzzy  confusion  Karl  saw  Mack  as  a  deliverer.  For  a  little 
while  he  could  still  feel  Clara's  hand  on  his  throat,  and  so 
he  squirmed  for  a  few  minutes  before  lying  still. 

She  urged  him  to  get  up;  he  neither  answered  nor  stirred. 
She  lit  a  candle  somewhere,  the  room  grew  light,  a  blue 

70 


zig-zag  pattern  appeared  on  the  ceiling,  but  Karl  lay  with  his 
head  on  the  sofa  cushion  exactly  as  Clara  had  placed  it  and 
did  not  move  a  finger's  breadth.  Clara  walked  round  the 
room,  her  skirt  rustling  about  her  legs;  she  seemed  to  pause 
for  a  long  time  by  the  window. 

‘Got  over  your  tantrums?'  he  heard  her  asking  at  last.  Karl 
thought  it  hard  that  in  this  room  which  Mr  Poll  under  had 
assigned  him-  for  the  night  he  could  find  no  peace.  The 
girl  kept  wandering  about,  stopping  and  talking  now  and 
then,  and  he  was  heartily  sick  of  her.  All  he  wanted  to  do 
was  to  fall  asleep  at  once  and  get  out  of  the  place  later.  He 
did  not  even  want  to  go  to  bed,  he  merely  wanted  to  stay 
where  he  was  on  the  sofa.  He  was  only  waiting  for  the  girl 
to  leave,  so  that  he  could  spring  to  the  door  after  her,  bolt 
it,  and  then  fling  himself  back  on  the  sofa  again.  He  felt  an 
intense  need  to  stretch  and  yawn,  but  he  did  not  want  to 
do  that  before  Clara.  And  so  he  lay  staring  at  the  ceiling, 
feeling  his  face  becoming  more  and  more  rigid,  and  a  fly 
which  was  hovering  about  flitted  before  his  eyes  without  his 
quite  knowing  what  it  was. 

Clara  stepped  over  to  him  again  and  leaned  across  his  line 
of  vision;  and  if  he  had  not  made  an  effort  he  would  have 
had  to  look  at  her. 

‘I'm  going  now,'  she  said.  ‘Perhaps  later  on  you'll  feel  like 
coming  to  see  me.  The  door  is  the  fourth  from  this  one  on 
the  same  side  of  the  corridor.  You  pass  the  three  next  doors, 
that's  to  say,  and  the  one  after  that  is  the  right  one.  I’m  not 
going  downstairs  again;  I  shall  just  stay  in  my  room.  You've 
made  me  thoroughly  tired  too.  I  shan’t  exactly  expect  you, 
but  if  you  want  to  come,  then  come.  Remember  that  you 
promised  to  play  the  piano  for  me.  But  perhaps  you’re  feel¬ 
ing  quite  prostrate  and  can’t  move;  well  then,  stay  here  and 
have  a  good  sleep.  I  shan’t  tell  my  father  anything  about  our 
little  scuffle,  not  for  the  present;  I*  mention  that  merely  in 
case  you  start  worrying  about  it.’  And  in  spite  of  her  osten¬ 
sible  tiredness  she  ran  lightly  out  of  the  room. 


71 


Karl  at  once  sat  up;  this  lying  down  had  already  become 
unendurable.  For  the  sake  of  using  his  limbs  he  went  to  the 
door  and  looked  out  into  the  corridor.  But  how  dark  it  was  ! 
He  felt  glad  when  he  had  shut  the  door  and  bolted  it  and 
stood  again  by  his  table  in  the  light  of  the  candle.  He  made 
up  his  mind  to  stay  no  longer  in  this  house,  but  to  go  down 
to  Mr  Pollunder,  tell  him  frankly  how  Clara  had  treated 
him  -  admitting  his  defeat  did  not  matter  a  straw  to  him  - 
and  with  that  abundant  justification  ask  leave  to  drive  or  to 
walk  home.  If  Mr  Pollunder  had  any  objection  to  his  im¬ 
mediate  return,  then  Karl  would  at  least  ask  him  to  instruct 
a  servant  to  conduct  him  to  the  nearest  hotel.  As  a  rule, 
hosts  were  not  treated  in  the  way  which  Karl  planned,  but 
still  more  seldom  were  guests  treated  as  Clara  had  treated 
him.  She  had  actually  regarded  as  a  kindness  her  promise 
to  say  nothing  to  Mr  Pollunder  about  their  scuffle,  and  that 
was  really  too  outrageous.  Had  he  been  invited  to  a  wrestling 
match,  then,  that  he  should  be  ashamed  of  being  thrown  by 
a  girl  who  had  apparently  spent  the  greater  part  of  her  life 
in  learning  wrestling  holds  ?  After  all,  she  had  probably  been 
taking  lessons  from  Mack.  She  could  tell  him  everything  if 
she  liked;  he  was  certainly  intelligent,  Karl  felt  sure  of  that, 
although  he  had  never  had  occasion  to  prove  it  in  any  single 
instance.  But  Karl  knew  also  that  if  he  were  to  have  lessons 
from  Mack  he  would  make  much  greater  progress  than  Clara 
had  done;  then  he  could  come  here  again  one  day,  most  likely 
without  any  invitation,  would  begin  by  studying  the  scene 
of  action,  an  exact  knowledge  of  which  had  been  a  great 
advantage  to  Clara,  and  then  he  would  seize  that  same  Clara 
and  fling  her  down  on  the  very  sofa  where  she  had  flung  him 
tonight. 

Now  he  had  merely  to  find  his  way  back  to  the  dining¬ 
room,  where  in  his  first  embarrassment  he  had  probably  laid 
down  his  hat  in  some  unsuitable  place.  Of  course  he  would 
take  the  candle  with  him,  but  even  with  a  light  it  was  not 
easy  to  find  one's  bearings.  For  instance,  he  did  not  even 

72 


know  whether  this  room  was  on  the  same  floor  as  the  dining¬ 
room.  On  the  way  here  Clara  had  kept  pulling  him,  so  that 
he  had  no  chance  to  look  around  him.  Mr  Green  and  the 
servants  with  the  great  candlesticks  had  also  given  him 
something  to  think  about;  in  short,  he  actually  could  not 
remember  whether  they  had  climbed  one  or  two  flights  of 
stairs  or  none  at  all.  To  judge  from  the  view,  the  room  was 
fairly  high  up,  and  so  he  tried  to  convince  himself  that  they 
must  have  climbed  stairs;  yet  at  the  front  door  there  had 
been  steps  to  climb,  so  why  should  not  this  side  of  the  house 
be  raised  above  ground-level  too?  If  only  there  were  a  ray  of 
light  to  be  seen  from  some  door  in  the  corridor  or  a  voice  to 
be  heard  in  the  distance,  no  matter  how  faintly ! 

His  watch,  a  present  from  his  uncle,  pointed  to  eleven;  he 
took  the  candle  and  went  out  into  the  corridor.  The  door  he 
left  open,  so  that  if  his  search  should  prove  unsuccessful  he 
might  at  least  find  his  room  again  and  in  case  of  dire  need 
the  door  of  Clara's  room.  For  safety  he  fixed  the  door  open 
with  a  chair,  so  that  it  might  not  shut  of  itself.  In  the  corridor 
he  made  the  unwelcome  discovery  -  naturally  he  turned  to 
the  left,  away  from  Clara's  room  -  that  there  was  a  draught 
blowing  against  his  face,  which  though  quite  feeble  might 
nevertheless  easily  blow  out  the  candle,  so  that  he  had  to 
guard  the  flame  with  his  hand  and  often  stop  altogether  to 
let  the  dying  flame  recover.  It  was  a  slow  method  of  progress 
and  it  made  the  way  seem  doubly  long.  Karl  had  already 
passed  great  stretches  of  blank  wall  completely  devoid  of 
doors;  one  could  not  imagine  what  lay  behind  them.  And 
then  he  came  to  one  door  after  another;  he  tried  to  open 
several  of  them;  they  were  locked  and  the  rooms  obviously 
unoccupied.  It  was  an  incredible  squandering  of  space  and 
Karl  thought  of  the  east  end  of  New  York  which  his  uncle 
had  promised  to  show  him,  where  it  was  said  that  several 
families  lived  in  one  little  room  an$l  the  home  of  a  whole 
family  consisted  of  one  comer  where  the  children  clustered 
round  their  parents.  And  here  so  many  rooms  stood  empty 


and  seemed  to  exist  merely  to  make  a  hollow  sound  when 
you  knocked  on  the  door.  Mr  Pollunder  seemed  to  Karl  to  be 
misled  by  false  friends  and  infatuated  with  his  daughter, 
which  was  his  ruin.  Uncle  Jacob  had  certainly  judged  him 
rightly,  and  only  his  axiom  that  it  was  not  his  business  to 
influence  Karl's  judgement  of  other  people  was  responsible 
for  this  visit  and  all  this  wandering  through  corridors.  To¬ 
morrow  Karl  would  tell  his  uncle  that  quite  frankly,  for  if 
he  followed  his  own  axiom  his  uncle  should  be  glad  to  hear  a 
nephew's  judgement  even  on  himself.  Besides,  that  axiom 
was  probably  the  only  thing  in  his  uncle  which  displeased 
Karl,  and  even  that  displeasure  was  not  unqualified. 

Suddenly  the  wall  on  one  side  of  the  corridor  came  to  an 
end  and  an  ice-cold,  marble  balustrade  appeared  in  its  place. 
Karl  set  the  candle  beside  him  and  cautiously  leaned  over.  A 
breath  of  dark  emptiness  met  him.  If  this  was  the  main  hall 
of  the  house  -  in  the  glimmer  of  the  candle  a  piece  of  vault¬ 
like  ceiling  could  be  seen  -  why  had  they  not  come  in  through 
it?  What  purpose  could  be  served  by  this  great,  deep  cham¬ 
ber?  One  stood  here  as  if  in  the  gallery  of  a  church.  Karl 
almost  regretted  that  he  could  not  stay  in  the  house  till 
morning;  he  would  have  liked  Mr  Pollunder  to  show  him  all 
round  it  by  daylight  and  explain  everything  to  him. 

The  balustrade  was  quite  short  and  soon  Karl  was  once 
more  groping  along  a  closed  corridor.  At  a  sudden  turning  he 
ran  full  tilt  into  the  wall,  and  only  the  unswerving  care 
with  which  he  convulsively  held  the  candle  saved  it  from 
falling  and  going  out.  As  the  corridor  seemed  to  have  no  end 
-  no  window  appeared  through  which  he  could  see  where  he 
was,  nothing  stirred  either  above  him  or  below  him  -  Karl 
began  to  think  that  he  was  going  round  in  a  circle  and  had  a 
faint  hope  that  he  would  come  to  the  door  of  his  room  again; 
but  neither  it  nor  the  balustrade  reappeared.  Until  now  he 
had  refrained  from  shouting,  for  he  did  not  want  to  raise  a 
noise  in  a  strange  house  at  such  a  late  hour;  but  now  he 
realized  that  it  would  not  matter  in  this  unlighted  house. 


74 


and  he  was  just  preparing  to  send  a  loud  Tialoo'  echoing 
along  the  corridor  in  both  directions  when  he  noticed  a  little 
light  approaching  from  behind  him,  the  way  that  he  had 
come.  Now  at  last  he  could  realize  the  length  of  that  straight 
corridor.  This  house  was  a  fortress,  not  a  mansion.  His  joy 
on  seeing  that  saving  light  was  so  great  that  he  forgot  all 
caution  and  ran  towards  it.  At  the  first  few  steps  he  took, 
his  candle  blew  out.  But  he  paid  no  attention,  for  he  did  not 
need  it  any  longer;  here  was  an  old  servant  with  a  lantern 
coming  towards  him  and  he  would  soon  show  him  the  right 
way. 

‘Who  are  you?'  asked  the  servant,  holding  the  lantern  up 
to  Karl's  face  and  illumining  his  own  as  well.  His  face  had  a 
somewhat  formal  look  because  of  a  great  white  beard  which 
ended  on  his  breast  in  silken  ringlets.  ‘He  must  be  a  faithful 
servant  if  they  let  him  wear  a  beard  like  that,'  thought  Karl, 
gazing  fixedly  at  the  beard  in  all  its  length  and  breadth, 
without  feeling  any  constraint  because  he  himself  was  being 
observed  in  turn.  He  replied  at  once  that  he  was  a  guest  of 
Mr  Pollunder's,  that  he  had  left  his  room  to  go  to  the  dining¬ 
room,  but  could  not  find  it. 

‘Oh  yes/  said  the  servant,  ‘we  haven't  had  the  electric 
light  laid  on  yet.'  '  \ 

‘I  know,'  said  Karl. 

‘Won’t  you  light  your  candle  at  my  lantern?'  asked  the 
servant. 

‘If  you  please,'  said  Karl,  doing  so. 

‘There's  such  a  draught  here  in  the  corridors,'  said  the 
servant.  ‘Candles  easily  get  blown  out;  that’s  why  I  have  a 
lantern.' 

‘Yes,  a  lantern  is  much  more  practical/  said  Karl. 

‘Why,  you're  all  covered  with  candle-drippings/  said  the 
servant,  holding  up  the  candle  to  Karl's  suit. 

I  never  even  noticed  it !’  cried  Karl,  feeling  distressed,  for 
it  was  his  black  suit,  which  his  uncle  said  looked  best  of  all 
upon  him.  His  wrestling  match  with  Clara  could  not  have 


75 


been  very  good  for  the  suit  either,  it  now  occurred  to  him. 
The  servant  was  obliging  enough  to  clean  the  suit  as  well  as 
could  be  done  on  the  spot:  Karl  kept  turning  round  and 
showing  him  another  mark  here  and  there,  which  the  man 
obediently  removed. 

‘But  why  should  there  be  such  a  draught  here?’  asked 
Karl  ,  as  they  went  on  again. 

Well,  there's  a  great  deal  of  building  still  to  be  done/  said 
the  servant.  ‘The  reconstruction  work  has  been  started,  of 
course,  but  it's  getting  on  very  slowly.  And  now  the  builders' 
workmen  have  gone  on  strike,  as  perhaps  you  know.  Building 
up  a  house  like  this  gives  lots  of  trouble.  Several  large 
breaches  have  been  made  in  the  walls,  which  nobody  has 
filled  in,  and  the  draught  blows  through  the  whole  house.  If 
I  didn't  stuff  my  ears  with  cotton-wool  I  couldn't  stand 
it/ 

‘Then  shouldn't  I  speak  louder?'  asked  Karl. 

‘No,  you  have  a  clear  voice,'  said  the  servant.  ‘But  to  come 
back  to  this  building;  especially  in  this  part,  near  the  chapel, 
which  will  certainly  have  to  be  shut  off  from  the  rest  of  the 
house  later,  the  draught  is  simply  unendurable.' 

‘So  the  balustrade  along  this  corridor  gives  on  to  a  chapel?' 

‘Yes.' 

‘I  thought  that  at  the  time,'  said  Karl. 

‘It  is  well  worth  seeing,'  said  the  servant.  ‘If  it  hadn't  been 
for  that,  Mr  Mack  probably  wouldn’t  have  bought  the  house.' 

‘Mr  Mack?'  asked  Karl.  ‘I  thought  the  house  belonged  to 
Mr  Pollunder.' 

‘Yes,  certainly,'  said  the  servant,  ‘but  it  was  Mr  Mack  who 
decided  the  purchase.  Don't  you  know  Mr  Mack?' 

‘Oh  yes,'  said  Karl.  ‘But  what  connexion  does  he  have  with 
Mr  Pollunder?' 

‘He  is  the  young  lady's  fiance,'  said  the  servant. 

‘I  certainly  didn’t  know  that,'  said  Karl,  stopping  short. 

‘Do  you  find  that  so  surprising?'  asked  the  servant. 

‘I’m  only  thinking  it  over.  If  you  don’t  know  about  such 


connexions,  you  can  easily  make  the  worst  kind  of  mistakes/ 
replied  Karl. 

Tm  only  surprised  that  they  haven’t  told  you  about  it/ 
said  the  servant. 

‘Yes,  that’s  true/  said  Karl,  feeling  abashed. 

‘Probably  they  thought  you  knew/  said  the  servant,  ‘it’s 
old  news  by  this  time.  But  here  we  are,’  and  he  opened  a  door 
behind  which  appeared  a  stair  that  led  straight  down  to  the 
back  door  of  the  dining-room  which  was  still  as  brightly 
illumined  as  at  Karl’s  arrival. 

Before  Karl  went  down  to  the  dining-room,  from  which 
the  voices  of  Mr  Pollunder  and  Mr  Green  could  be  heard  still 
talking  as  they  had  talked  two  hours  before,  the  servant  said: 
‘If  you  like,  I’ll  wait  for  you  here  and  take  you  back  to  your 
room.  It’s  always  difficult  to  find  one’s  way  about  here  on 
the  first  evening/ 

‘My  room  will  never  see  me  again/  said  Karl,  without 
knowing  why  he  felt  sad  as  he  gave  this  information. 

‘It  won’t  be  so  bad  as  all  that/  said  the  servant,  smiling  in 
a  slightly  superior  way  and  patting  him  on  the  arm.  Prob¬ 
ably  he  construed  Karl’s  words  as  meaning  that  Karl  intended 
to  stay  up  all  night  in  the  dining-room,  talking  and  drinking 
with  the  two  gentlemen.  Karl  did  not  want  to  make  any 
confessions  just  then,  also  he  reflected  that  this  servant, 
whom 'he  liked  better  than  the  other  servants  in  the  house, 
would  be  able  to  direct  him  on  his  way  to  New  York,  and  so 
he  said:  ‘If  you  would  wait  here,  it  would  certainly  be  a 
great  kindness  and  I  gratefully  accept  it.  I’ll  come  up  in  a 
little  while,  in  any  case,  and  tell  you  what  I’m  going  to  do. 
I  think  that  I  may  need  your  help  yet.’  ‘Good/  said  the 
servant,  setting  his  lantern  on  the  floor  and  seating  himself 
on  a  low  pedestal,  which  was  probably  vacant  on  account 
of  the  reconstruction  work.  ‘I’ll  wait  here,  then.  You  can 
leave  the  candle  with  me  too/  he  added,  as  Karl  made  to  go 
downstairs  with  the  lighted  candle  in  his  hand. 

‘I’m  not  noticing  what  I’m  doing/  said  Karl,  and  he  handed 

11 


the  candle  to  the  servant,  who  merely  nodded  to  him,  though 
it  was  impossible  to  say  whether  the  nod  was  deliberate  or 
whether  it  was  caused  by  his  stroking  his  beard  with  his 
hand. 

Karl  opened  the  door,  which  through  no  fault  of  his  rattled 
noisily,  for  it  consisted  of  a  single  glass  panel  that  almost 
jumped  from  the  frame  if  the  door  were  opened  quickly  and 
held  fast  only  by  the  handle.  Karl  let  the  door  swing  back 
again  in  alarm,  for  he  had  wanted  to  enter  the  room  as 
quietly  as  possible.  Without  turning  round  he  was  aware 
that  behind  him  the  servant,  who  had  apparently  descended 
from  his  pedestal,  was  now  shutting  the  door  carefully  and 
without  the  slightest  sound. 

'Forgive  me  for  disturbing  you/  he  said  to  the  two  gentle¬ 
men,  who  stared  at  him  with  round,  astonished  faces.  At 
the  same  time  he  flung  a  hasty  glance  round  the  room,  to 
see  if  he  could  discover  his  hat  somewhere.  But  it  was 
nowhere  to  be  seen;  the  dishes  on  the  dining-table  had  all 
been  cleared  away;  perhaps,  he  thought  uncomfortably,  the 
hat  had  been  carried  off  to  the  kitchen  along  with  them. 

'But  where  have  you  left  Clara?'  asked  Mr  Pollunder,  to 
whom  the  intrusion,  however,  did  not  seem  to  be  unwelcome, 
for  he  at  once  changed  his  position  in  the  chair  and  turned 
his  face  full  upon  Karl.  Mr  Green  put  on  an  air  of  indifference, 
pulled  out  a  pocket-book,  in  size  and  thickness  a  giant  of  its 
kind,  seemed  to  be  searching  in  its  many  compartments  for 
some  particular  paper,  but  during  the  search  kept  reading 
other  papers  which  chanced  to  come  his  way. 

'I  have  a  request  to  make  which  you  must  not  misunder¬ 
stand,'  said  Karl,  walking  up  hastily  to  Mr  Pollunder  and 
putting  his  hand  on  the  arm  of  his  chair,  to  get  as  near  to 
him  as  he  could. 

'And  what  request  can  that  be?’  asked  Mr  Pollunder, 
giving  Karl  a  frank  open  look.  ‘It  is  granted  already.’  And 
he  put  his  arm  round  Karl  and  drew  him  between  his  knees. 
Karl  submitted  willingly,  though  as  a  rule  he  felt  much  too 

78 


grown  up  for  such  treatment.  But  of  course  it  made  the 
utterance  of  his  request  all  the  more  difficult. 

'And  how  do  you  really  like  being  here?'  asked  Mr 
Pollunder.  'Don’t  you  find  that  one  gets  a  kind  of  free  feeling 
on  coming  out  of  the  town  into  the  country?  Usually’  -  and 
he  looked  askance  at  Mr  Green,  a  glance  of  unmistakable 
meaning,  which  was  partly  screened  by  Karl  -  'usually  I  get 
that  feeling  every  evening.’ 

'He  talks/  thought  Karl,  'as  if  he  knew  nothing  about  this 
huge  house,  the  endless  corridors,  the  chapel,  the  empty 
rooms,  the  darkness  everywhere.’ 

'Well/  said  Mr  Pollunder,  'out  with  your  request!’  And 
he  gave  Karl,  who  stood  silent,  a  friendly  shake. 

'Please/  said  Karl,  and  much  as  he  lowered  his  voice  he 
could  not  keep  Green,  sitting  there,  from  hearing  everything, 
though  he  would  gladly  have  concealed  from  him  this  re¬ 
quest,  which  might  easily  be  construed  as  an  insult  to 
Pollunder  -  'Please  let  me  go  home  now,  late  as  it  is.’ 

And  once  he  had  put  the  worst  into  words,  all  the  rest 
came  pouring  out  after  it,  and  he  said  without  the  slightest 
insincerity  things  of  which  he  had  never  even  thought  before. 
'I  want  above  all  to  get  home.  I’ll  be  glad  to  come  again,  for 
wherever  you  are,  Mr  Pollunder,  I’ll  always  be  glad  to  stay. 
Only  tonight  I  can’t  stay  here.  You  know  that  my  uncle  was 
unwilling  to  give  me  permission  for  this  visit.  He  must  have 
had  good  reasons  for  that,  as  for  everything  that  he  does, 
and  I  had  the  presumption  literally  to  force  permission  from 
him  against  his  better  judgement.  I  simply  exploited  his 
affection  for  me.  It  doesn’t  matter  at  all  what  his  objections 
were;  all  that  I  know  with  absolute  certainty  is  that  there 
was  nothing  in  these  objections  which  could  offend  you,  Mr 
Pollunder,  for  you’re  the  best,  the  very  best  friend  that  my 
uncle  has.  Nobody  else  can  even  remotely  be  compared  with 
you  among  my  uncle’s  friends.  And  that  is  the  only  excuse 
for  my  disobedience,  though  an  insufficient  one.  You  probably 
have  no  first-hand  knowledge  of  the  relations  between  my 

79 


uncle  and  me,  so  I’ll  mention  only  the  main  points.  Until  my 
English  studies  are  finished  and  while  I  am  still  insufficiently 
versed  in  practical  things,  I  am  entirely  dependent  on  my 
uncle’s  kindness,  which  I  can  accept,  of  course,  being  a 
relation.  You  mustn’t  think  that  I’m  in  a  position  yet  to  earn 
my  living  decently  -  and  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  it  in 
any  other  way.  I’m  afraid  my  education  has  been  too  im¬ 
practical  for  that.  I  managed  to  scrape  through  four  classes 
of  a  European  High  School  with  moderate  success,  and  for 
earning  a  livelihood  that  means  less  than  nothing,  for  our 
schools  are  very  much  behind  the  times  in  their  teaching 
methods.  You  would  laugh  if  I  were  to  tell  you  the  kind  of 
things  I  learned.  If  a  boy  can  go  on  studying,  finish  his  school 
course  and  enter  the  University,  then,  probably,  it  all 
straightens  out  in  the  long  run  and  he  finishes  up  with  a 
proper  education  that  lets  him  do  something  and  gives  him 
the  confidence  to  set  about  earning  a  living.  But  unluckily 
I  was  tom  right  out  of  that  systematic  course  of  study. 
Sometimes  I  think  I  know  nothing,  and  in  any  case  the  best 
of  my  knowledge  wouldn’t  be  adequate  for  America.  Some 
of  the  high  schools  in  my  country  have  been  reformed 
recently,  teaching  modem  languages  and  perhaps  even  com¬ 
mercial  subjects,  but  when  I  left  my  primary  school  there 
were  none  of  these.  My  father  certainly  wanted  me  to  learn 
English,  but  in  the  first  place  I  couldn’t  foresee  then  that  I 
would  have  such  bad  luck  and  that  I  would  actually  need 
English,  and  in  the  second  place  I  had  to  learn  a  great  deal 
of  other  things  at  school,  so  that  I  didn’t  have  much  time  to 
spare  -  I  mention  all  this  to  show  you  how  dependent  I  am 
on  my  uncle,  and  how  deeply  I  am  bound  to  him  in  conse¬ 
quence.  You  must  admit  that  in  these  circumstances  I  am 
not  in  a  position  to  offend  in  the  slightest  against  even  his 
unexpressed  wishes.  And  so  if  I  am  to  make  good  even  half 
of  the  offence  which  I  have  committed  against  him,  I  must 
go  home  at  once.’ 

During  this  long  speech  of  Karl’s,  Mr  Pollunder  had 

80  j 


listened  attentively,  now  and  then  tightening  his  arm  round 
Karl,  though  imperceptibly,  particularly  when  Uncle  Jacob 
was  mentioned,  and  several  times  gazing  seriously  and  as  if 
expectantly  at  Green,  who  was  still  occupied  with  his  pocket- 
book.  But  Karl  had  felt  more  and  more  restless  the  more 
clearly  he  became  aware  of  his  relation  to  his  uncle  during 
his  speech,  and  involuntarily  he  struggled  to  free  himself 
from  Pollunder’s  arm.  Everything  cramped  him  here;  the 
road  leading  to  his  uncle  through  that  glass  door,  down  the 
steps,  through  the  avenue,  along  the  country  roads,  through 
the  suburbs  to  the  great  main  street  where  his  uncle’s  house 
was,  seemed  to  him  a  strictly  ordered  whole,  which  lay  there 
empty,  smooth,  and  prepared  for  him,  and  called  to  him 
with  a  strong  voice.  Mr  Pollunder’s  kindness  and  Mr  Green’s 
loathsomeness  ran  into  a  blur  together,  and  all  that  he  asked 
from  that  smoky  room  was  permission  to  leave.  He  felt  cut 
off  from  Mr  Poll  under,  prepared  to  do  battle  against  Mr 
Green,  and  yet  all  round  him  was  a  vague  fear,  whose  impact 
troubled  his  sight. 

He  took  a  step  back  and  now  stood  equally  distant  from 
Mr  Pollunder  and  Mr  Green. 

‘Hadn’t  you  something  to  say  to  him  ?’  asked  Mr  Pollunder, 
turning  to  Mr  Green  and  seizing  the  man’s  hand  imploringly. 

‘I  don’t  know  what  I  could  have  to  say  to  him/  said  Mr 
Green,  who  had  taken  a  letter  from  his  pocket-book  at  last 
and  laid  it  before  him  on  the  table.  ‘It  is  to  his  credit  that  he 
wants  to  go  back  to  his  uncle,  and  one  might  naturally 
assume  that  that  would  give  his  uncle  great  pleasure.  Unless 
he  has  angered  his  uncle  already  too  deeply  by  his  dis¬ 
obedience,  which  is  only  too  possible.  In  that  case  it  would 
certainly  be  better  for  him  to  stay  here.  It’s  difficult  to  say 
anything  definite;  we’re  both  friends  of  his  uncle  and  it 
would  be  hard  to  say  whether  Mr  Pollunder’s  or  my  friend¬ 
ship  ranks  highest;  but  we  can’t  see  into  his  uncle’s  mind, 
especially  at  so  many  miles’  distance  from  New  York.’ 

Please,  Mr  Green/  said  Karl,  overcoming  his  distaste  and 

81 


approaching  Mr  Green,  ‘I  can  tell  from  what  you  say  that 
you  too  think  it  would  be  best  for  me  to  go  back  at  once/ 

‘I  said  nothing  of  the  kind/  replied  Mr  Green,  and  he  once 
more  returned  to  his  contemplation  of  the  letter,  running 
his  fingers  over  the  edges  of  it.  Apparently  he  wished  to 
indicate  that  he  had  been  asked  a  question  by  Mr  Pollunder 
and  had  answered  it,  while  Karl  was  no  concern  of  his  at  all. 

Meanwhile  Mr  Pollunder  stepped  over  to  Karl  and  gently 
led  him  away  from  Mr  Green  to  the  big  window. 

‘Dear  Mr  Rossmann/  he  said,  bending  down  to  Karl’s  ear 
and  as  a  preparation  for  what  he  had  to  say  passing  his 
handkerchief  over  his  face  until  it  encountered  his  nose, 
which  he  blew,  ‘you  must  not  think  that  I  wish  to  keep  you 
here  against  your  will.  There  is  no  question  of  that.  I  can’t 
put  the  car  at  your  disposal,  I  admit,  for  it’s  parked  in  a  public 
garage  a  good  distance  from  here,  since  I  haven’t  had  the  time 
yet  to  build  a  garage  for  myself  here,  where  everything  is  still 
under  construction.  The  chauffeur  again  doesn’t  sleep  here 
but  somewhere  near  the  garage;  I  really  don’t  know  where, 
myself.  Besides,  he  isn’t  supposed  to  be  on  duty  just  now; 
he’s  merely  expected  to  appear  at  the  right  time  in  the 
morning.  But  all  this  would  be  no  obstacle  to  your  returning 
at  once,  for  if  you  insist  upon  it  I’ll  accompany  you  at  once 
to  the  nearest  railway  station,  though  it’s  so  far  away  that 
you  wouldn’t  get  home  much  sooner  than  if  you  came  with 
me  in  my  car  tomorrow  morning  -  we  start  at  seven.’ 

‘Then,  Mr  Pollunder,  I  would  rather  go  by  train  all  the 
same,’  said  Karl.  ‘I  never  thought  of  the  train.  You  say 
yourself  that  I  would  arrive  sooner  by  train  than  if  I  left 
tomorrow  in  your  car/ 

‘But  it  would  make  only  a  very  little  difference/ 

‘All  the  same,  all  the  same,  Mr  Pollunder,’  said  Karl,  ‘I’ll 
always  be  glad  to  come  here  again,  remembering  your  kind¬ 
ness,  that  is,  of  course,  if  after  my  behaviour  tonight  you 
ever  invite  me  again;  and  perhaps  next  time  I’ll  be  able  to 
explain  more  clearly  why  every  minute  that  keeps  me  away 

82 


from  my  uncle  now  is  so  important  to  me/  And  as  if  he  had 
already  received  permission  to  go  away,  he  added :  ‘But  you 
mustn’t  come  with  me  on  any  account.  It’s  really  quite 
unnecessary.  There’s  a  servant  outside  who’ll  be  glad  to  show 
me  the  way  to  the  station.  Now,  I  have  only  to  find  my  hat.’ 
And  with  these  words  he  walked  across  the  room  to  take  a 
last  hasty  look,  in  case  his  hat  were  lying  somewhere. 

‘Perhaps  I  could  help  you  out  with  a  cap?’  said  Mr  Green, 
drawing  a  cap  from  his  pocket.  ‘Maybe  it  will  serve  you  for 
the  time  being?’ 

Karl  stopped  in  amazement  and  said :  ‘But  I  can’t  deprive 
you  of  your  cap.  I  can  go  quite  well  with  my  head  bare.  I 
don't  need  anything.’ 

‘It  isn’t  my  cap.  You  just  take  it !  ’ 

‘In  that  case, -thanks,’  said  Karl,  so  as  not  to  delay  any 
longer,  taking  the  cap.  He  put  it  on  and  could  not  help 
laughing,  for  it  fitted  him  perfectly;  then  he  took  it  off  again 
and  examined  it,  but  could  not  find  the  particular  thing  that 
he  was  looking  for;  it  seemed  a  perfectly  new  cap.  ‘It  fits  so 
well !  ’  he  said. 

‘So  the  cap  fits !  ’  cried  Mr  Green,  thumping  the  table. 

Karl  was  already  on  his  way  to  the  door  to  fetch  the 
servant,  when  Mr  Green  got  up,  stretched  himself  after  his 
ample  meal  and  his  long  rest,  struck  himself  resoundingly  on 
the  chest,  and  said  in  a  voice  between  advice  and  command : 
‘Before  you  go,  you  must  say  good-bye  to  Miss  Clara.’ 

‘Yes,  you  must  do  that,’  agreed  Mr  Pollunder,  who  had 
also  got  up.  From  the  way  in  which  he  spoke  one  could  tell 
that  the  words  did  not  come  from  his  heart;  he  kept  flapping 
his  hands  feebly  against  the  side  of  his  trousers  and  buttoning 
and  re-buttoning  his  jacket,  which  after  the  fashion  of  the 
moment  was  quite  short  and  scarcely  reached  his  hips,  an 
unbecoming  garment  for  such  a  stout  man  as  Mr  Pollunder. 
One  also  had  the  definite  feeling  asjie  stood  there  beside  Mr 
Green  that  Mr  Pollunder^  fatness  was  not  a  healthy  fatness. 
His  massive  back  was  somewhat  bent,  his  paunch  looked  soft 

i  83 


and  flabby,  an  actual  burden,  and  his  face  was  pallid  and 
worried.  Mr  Green,  on  the  other  hand,  was  perhaps  even 
fatter  than  Mr  Pollunder,  but  it  was  a  homogeneous,  balanced 
fatness;  he  stood  with  his  heels  together  like  a  soldier,  he 
bore  his  head  with  a  jaunty  erectness.  He  looked  like  a  great 
athlete,  a  captain  of  athletes. 

Tou  are  to  go  first  then/  Mr  Green  continued,  ‘to  Miss 
Clara.  That  is  bound  to  be  pleasant  for  you  and  it  suits  my 
tune-table  excellently  as  well.  For  before  you  leave  here  I 
have  as  a  matter  of  fact  something  of  interest  to  tell  you, 
which  will  probably  also  decide  whether  you  are  to  go  back 
or  not.  But  I  am  unfortunately  bound  by  my  orders  to  divulge 
nothing  to  you  before  midnight.  You  can  imagine  that  Fm 
sorry  for  that  myself,  since  it  upsets  my  night's  rest,  but  I 
shall  stick  to  my  instructions.  It  is  a  quarter-past  eleven  now, 
so  that  I  can  finish  discussing  my  business  with  Mr  Pollunder, 
which  you  would  only  interrupt;  besides,  you  can  have  a 
very  pleasant  time  with  Miss  Clara.  Then  at  twelve 
punctually  you  will  report  here,  where  you  will  learn  what  is 
necessary/ 

Could  Karl  reject  this  request,  which  demanded  from  him 
only  the  minimum  of  politeness  and  gratitude  towards  Mr 
Pollunder  and  which,  moreover,  had  been  put  by  a  man 
customarily  rude  and  indifferent,  while  Mr  Pollunder,  whom 
it  really  concerned,  intervened  neither  by  word  nor  glance? 
And  what  was  the  interesting  news  which  he  was  not  to 
learn  until  midnight?  If  it  did  not  hasten  his  return  by  at 
least  the  forty-five  minutes  that  it  now  made  him  waste,  it 
would  have  little  interest  for  him.  But  his  greatest  scruple 
was  whether  he  dared  visit  Clara  at  all,  seeing  that  she  was 
his  enemy.  If  only  he  had  the  stone-chisel  with  him  which 
his  uncle  had  given  him  as  a  letter  weight !  Clara’s  room 
might  prove  a  really  dangerous  den.  Yet  it  was  quite  im¬ 
possible  to  say  anything  against  Clara  here,  for  she  was 
Pollunder’s  daughter  and,  as  he  had  just  heard,  Mack’s 
fiancee  as  well.  If  she  had  only  behaved  a  very  little  differently 

84 


towards  him,  he  would  have  frankly  admired  her  for  her 
connexions.  He  was  still  considering  all  this  when  he  per¬ 
ceived  that  no  reflection  was  expected  from  him,  for  Green 
opened  the  door  and  said  to  the  servant,  who  jumped  up  from 
his  pedestal :  ‘Conduct  this  young  man  to  Miss  Clara/ 

‘This  is  how  commands  are  executed/  thought  Karl,  as 
the  servant,  almost  running,  groaning  with  infirmity,  led 
him  by  a  remarkably  short  cut  to  Clara’s  room.  As  Karl  was 
passing  his  own  room,  whose  door  was  still  open,  he  asked 
leave  to  go  in  for  a  minute,  hoping  to  compose  himself.  But 
the  servant  would  not  allow  it. 

‘No/  he  said,  ‘you  must  come  along  to  Miss  Clara.  You 
heard  that  yourself/ 

‘I  only  want  to  stay  there  a  minute/  said  Karl,  thinking 
what  a  relief  it.  would  be  to  lie  on  the  sofa  for  a  little,  to 
quicken  up  the  time  between  now  and  midnight. 

‘Don’t  obstruct  me  in  the  execution  of  my  duty/  said  the 
servant. 

‘He  seems  to  imagine  it’s  a  punishment  to  be  taken  to  Miss 
Clara/  thought  Karl,  and  he  went  on  a  few  steps,  but  then 
defiantly  stoppedagain. 

‘Do  come,  young  sir/  said  the  servant,  ‘since  you’re  still 
here.  I  know,  that  you  wanted  to  leave  this  very  night,  but 
we  don’t  always  get  what  we  want,  and  I  told  you  already 
that  it  would  hardly  be  possible.’ 

‘I  do  want  to  leave  and  I  will  leave  too/  said  Karl,  ‘and 
I’m  merely  going  to  say  good-bye  to  Miss  Clara.’ 

Ts  that  so?’  said  the  servant,  and  Karl  could  see  that  he 
did  not  believe  a  word  of  it.  ‘Why  are  you  so  unwilling  to 
say  good-bye  then?  Do  come  along/ 

‘Who  is  that  in  the  corridor?’  said  Clara’s  voice,  and  they 
saw  her  leaning  out  of  a  door  near  by,  a  big  red-shaded  table- 
lamp  in  her  hand.  The  servant  hurried  up  to  her  and  gave 
his  message;  Karl  slowly  followed  him.  ‘You’re  late  in 
coming/  said  Clara. 

Without  ,  answering  her  for  the  moment,  Karl  said  to  the 

85 


servant  softly,  but  in  a  tone  of  stem  command,  for  he  already 
knew  the  man’s  character:  ‘You’ll  wait  for  me  just  outside 
this  door !  * 

I  was  just  going  to  bed,’  said  Clara,  setting  the  lamp  on 
the  table.  As  he  had  done  in  the  dining-room,  the  servant 
carefully  shut  this  door  too  from  the  outside.  ‘It’s  after  half¬ 
past  eleven  already.’ 

After  half-past  eleven?’  said  Karl  interrogatively,  as  if 
alarmed  at  these  figures.  ‘But  in  that  case  I  must  say  good-bye 
at  once,’  he  went  on,  ‘for  at  twelve  punctually  I  must  be 
down  in  the  dining-room.’ 

4 What  urgent  business  you  seem  to  have!’  said  Clara, 
absently  smoothing  the  folds  of  her  loose  nightdress.  Her 
face  was  glowing  and  she  kept  on  smiling.  Karl  decided  that 
there  was  no  danger  of  getting  into  another  quarrel  with 
Clara.  ‘Couldn’t  you  play  the  piano  for  a  little  after  all,  as 
Papa  promised  yesterday  and  you  yourself  promised  tonight?’ 

‘But  isn’t  it  too  late  now?’  asked  Karl.  He  would  have 
liked  to  oblige  her,  for  she  was  quite  different  now  from 
what  she  had  been  before;  it  was  as  if  she  had  somehow 
ascended  into  the  Pollunder  circle  and  into  Mack’s  as  well. 

‘Yes,  it  is  late,’  she  said,  and  her  desire  for  music  seemed 
already  to  have  passed.  ‘And  every  sound  here  echoes  through 
the  whole  house;  I’m  afraid  that  if  you  play  now  it  will 
waken  up  the  very  servants  in  the  attics.’ 

‘Then  I  won’t  bother  to  play;  you  see,  I  hope  to  come  back 
again  another  day;  besides,  if  it  isn’t  too  great  a  bother,  you 
might  visit  my  uncle  and  have  a  look  at  my  room  while  you 
are  there.  I  have  a  marvellous  piano.  My  uncle  gave  it  to  me. 
Then,  if  you  like,  I’ll  play  all  my  pieces  to  you;  there  aren’t 
many  of  them,  unfortunately,  and  they  don't  suit  such  a  fine 
instrument  either,  which  needs  a  really  great  player  to  use  it. 
But  you  may  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  a  good  player  if 
you  tell  me  beforehand  when  you  are  coming,  for  my  uncle 
means  to  engage  a  famous  teacher  for  me  -  you  can  imagine 
how  I  look  forward  to  it  -  and  his  playing  would  certainly 

86 


make  it  worth  your  while  to  pay  me  a  visit  during  one  of  my 
lessons.  To  be  quite  frank,  I'm  glad  that  it's  too  late  to  play, 
for  I  can't  really  play  yet,  you  would  be  surprised  how  badly 
I  play.  And  now  allow  me  to  take  my  leave;  after  all  it  must 
be  your  bedtime.'  And  as  Clara  was  looking  at  him  with  a 
kindly  expression  and  seemed  to  bear  him  no  ill-will  because 
of  the  quarrel,  he  added  with  a  smile,  while  he  held  out  his 
hand:  ‘In  my  country  people  say  “Sleep  well  and  sweet 
dreams".' 

‘Wait/  she  said,  without  taking  his  hand,  ‘perhaps  you 
might  play  after  all.'  And  she  disappeared  through  a  little 
side  door,  beside  which  the  piano  stood. 

‘What  next?'  thought  Karl.  ‘I  can’t  wait  long,  even  if  she 
is  nice  to  me.’  There  was  a  knock  at  the  corridor  door  and  the 
servant,  without  daring  quite  to  open  it,  whispered  through 
a  little  chink:  ‘Excuse  me;  I’ve  just  been  called  away  and 
can’t  wait  any  longer.' 

‘Then  you  can  go,'  said  Karl,  who  now  felt  confident  that 
he  could  find  his  way  alone  to  the  dining-room.  ‘But  leave 
the  lantern  for  me  at  the  door.  How  late  is  it?' 

‘Almost  a  quarter  to  twelve,’  said  the  servant. 

‘How  slowly  the  time  passes,’  said  Karl  to  himself.  The 
servant  was  shutting  the  door  when  Karl  remembered  that 
he  had  not  given  him  a  tip,  took  a  shilling  from  his  trouser 
pocket  -  in  the  American  fashion  he  now  always  carried  his 
loose  coins  jingling  in  his  trouser  pocket,  his  bank-notes,  on 
the  other  hand,  in  his  waistcoat  pocket  -  and  handed  it  to  the 
servant  with  the  words :  ‘For  your  kindness.’ 

Clara  had  already  come  back,  patting  her  trim  hair  with 
her  fingers,  when  it  occurred  to  Karl  that  he  should  not  have 
let  the  servant  go  after  all,  for  who  would  now  show  him 
the  way  to  the  railway  station?  Well,  Mr  Pollunder  would 
sure]y  manage  to  hunt  up  a  servant  somewhere,  and  perhaps 
the  old  servant  had  been  summoned  to  the  dining-room  and 
so  would  be  again  at  his  disposal. 

‘Won’t  you  really  play  a  little  for  me?  One  hears  music 

§2 


so  seldom  here  that  it's  a  pity  to  miss  any  opportunity  of 
hearing  it/ 

It  s  high  time  I  began  then/  said  Karl  without  further 
consideration,  sitting  down  at  once  at  the  piano. 

'Do  you  want  any  special  music?'  asked  Clara. 

'No,  thanks,  I  can’t  even  read  music  correctly/  replied 
Karl,  and  he  began  to  play.  It  was  a  little  air  which,  as  he 
knew  perfectly  well,  had  to  be  played  somewhat  slowly  to 
make  it  even  comprehensible,  especially  to  strangers;  but  he 
strummed  it  out  in  blatant  march  time.  When  he  ended  it 
the  shattered  silence  of  the  house  closed  round  them  again, 
almost  distressfully.  They  sat  there  as  if  frozen  with  embar¬ 
rassment  and  did  not  move. 

'Quite  good/  said  Clara,  but  there  was  no  formula  of  polite¬ 
ness  which  could  have  flattered  Karl  after  that  performance. 

'How  late  is  it?’  he  asked. 

'A  quarter  to  twelve/ 

'Then  I  still  have  a  little  time/  he  said  and  thought  to 
himself:  'Which  is  it  to  be?  I  needn’t  play  through  all  the 
ten  tunes  I  know,  but  I  might  play  one  at  least  as  well  as  I 
can/  And  he  began  to  play  his  beloved  soldier’s  song.  So 
slowly  that  the  roused  longing  of  his  listener  yearned  for  the 
next  note,  which  Karl  held  back  and  yielded  reluctantly.  He 
had  actually  to  pick  out  the  keys  first  with  his  eyes  as  in 
playing  all  of  his  tunes,  but  he  also  felt  rising  within  him  a 
song  which  reached  past  the  end  of  this  song,  seeking  another 
end  which  it  could  not  find.  ‘I’m  no  good/  said  Karl  after  he 
had  finished,  gazing  at  Clara  with  tears  in  his  eyes. 

Then  from  the  next  room  came  a  sound  of  handclapping. 
'Someone  has  been  listening!’  cried  Karl,  taken  aback. 
'Mack/  said  Clara  softly.  And  already  he  heard  Mack  shout¬ 
ing  :  'Karl  Rossmann,  Karl  Rossmann  !  ’ 

Karl  swung  both  feet  over  the  piano  stool  and  opened  the 
door.  He  saw  Mack  half  sitting  and  half  reclining  in  a  huge 
double  bed  with  the  blankets  loosely  flung  over  his  legs.  A 
canopy  of  blue  silk  was  the  sole  and  somewhat  school-girlish 

88 


ornament  of  the  bed,  which  was  otherwise  quite  plain  and 
roughly  fashioned  out  of  heavy  wood.  On  the  bedside  table 
only  a  candle  was  burning,  but  the  sheets  and  Mack's  night¬ 
shirt  were  so  white  that  the  candle-light  falling  upon  them 
was  thrown  off  in  an  almost  dazzling  reflection;  even  the 
canopy  shone,  at  least  at  the  edges,  with  its  slightly  billowing 
silk  tent  which  was  not  stretched  quite  taut.  But  immediately 
behind  Mack  the  bed  and  everything  else  sank  into  complete 
darkness.  Clara  leaned  against  the  bed-post  and  had  eyes  now 
only  for  Mack. 

'Hallo/  said  Mack,  reaching  his  hand  to  Karl.  'You  play 
very  well;  up  to  now  Fve  only  known  your  talent  for  riding/ 

Tm  as  bad  at  the  one  as  at  the  other/  said  Karl.  ‘If  I’d 
known  you  were  listening,  I  certainly  wouldn't  have  played. 
But  your  young  lady  -  He  stopped,  he  hesitated  to  say 
'fiancee',  since  Mack  and  Clara  obviously  shared  the  same 
bed  already. 

'But  I  guessed  it/  said  Mack,  'and  so  Clara  had  to  lure  you 
out  here  from  New  York,  or  eke  I  would  never  have  heard 
your  playing.  It’s  certainly  amateurish  enough,  and  even  in 
these  two  airs,  which  have  been  set  very  simply  and  which 
you  have  practised  a  good  deal,  you  made  one  or  two  mis¬ 
takes;  but  all  the  same  it  pleased  me  greatly,  quite  apart 
from  the  fact  that  I  never  despise  players  of  any  kind.  But 
won’t  you  sit  down  and  stay  for  a  little  while  with  us  ?  Clara, 
give  him  a  chair/ 

'Thanks/  said  Karl  awkwardly.  'I  can't  stay,  glad  as  I 
would  be  to  stay  here.  It's  taken  me  too  lpng  to  discover  that 
there  are  such  comfortable  rooms  in  this  house/ 

‘I'm  having  everything  reconstructed  in  this  style/  said 
Mack. 

At  that  moment  twelve  strokes  of  a  bell  rang  out  in  rapid 
succession,  each  breaking  into  the  one  before.  Karl  could 
feel  on  his  cheeks  the  wind  made  by  the  swinging  of  that 
great  bell.  What  sort  of  village  could  it  be  which  had  such 
bells ! 


89 


It’s  high  time  I  was  gone,’  said  Karl,  stretching  out  his 
hand  to  Mack  and  Clara  without  shaking  theirs  and  rushing 
off  into  the  corridor. 

He  found  no  lantern  there  and  regretted  having  tipped  the 
servant  so  soon. 

He  began  to  feel  his  way  along  the  wall  to  his  own  room, 
but  had  hardly  covered  half  the  way  when  he  saw  Mr  Green 
hurriedly  bobbing  towards  him  with  an  upraised  candle.  In 
the  hand  holding  the  candle  he  was  also  clutching  a  letter. 

‘Rossmann,  why  didn’t  you  come?  Why  have  you  kept  me 
waiting?  What  on  earth  has  kept  you  so  long  with  Miss 
Clara?’ 

‘How  many  questions!’  thought  Karl,  ‘and  now  he’s 
pushing  me  to  the  wall/  for  indeed  Green  was  standing  quite 
close  to  Karl,  who  had  to  lean  his  back  against  the  wall.  In 
this  corridor  Green  took  on  an  almost  absurd  size,  and  Karl 
wondered  in  jest  if  he  could  have  eaten  up  good  Mr 
Pollunder. 

‘You  certainly  aren’t  a  man  of  your  word.  You  promised 
to  come  down  at  twelve  and  instead  of  that  here  you  are 
prowling  round  Miss  Clara’s  door.  But  I  promised  you  some 
interesting  news  at  midnight,  and  here  it  is.’  And  with  that 
he  handed  Karl  the  letter.  On  the  envelope  was  written :  To 
Karl  Rossmann,  to  be  delivered  personally  at  midnight, 
wherever  he  may  be  found.’ 

‘After  all,’  said  Mr  Green,  while  Karl  opened  the  letter,  ‘I 
think  I  am  due  some  thanks  for  driving  out  here  from  New 
York  on  your  account,  so  that  you  shouldn’t  expect  me  to 
chase  after  you  through  these  corridors  as  well.’ 

‘From  my  uncle,’  said  Karl,  almost  as  soon  as  he  glanced 
at  the  letter.  ‘I  have  been  expecting  it,’  he  said,  turning  to 
Mr  Green. 

‘Whether  you  were  expecting  it  or  not  doesn’t  matter  to 
me  in  the  least.  You  just  read  it,’  said  Green,  holding  up  the 
candle  to  Karl. 

Karl  read  by  its  light : 


90 


DearNephew, 

As  you  will  already  have  realized  during  our  much  too  brief 
companionship,  I  am  essentially  a  man  of  principle.  That  is  un¬ 
pleasant  and  depressing  not  only  to  those  who  come  in  contact 
with  me,  but  also  to  myself  as  well.  Yet  it  is  my  principles  that 
have  made  me  what  I  am,  and  no  one  can  ask  me  to  deny  my 
fundamental -self.  Not  even  you,  my  dear  nephew.  Though  you 
would  be  my  first  choice,  if  it  ever  occurred  to  me  to  permit  such 
a  general  assault  upon  me.  Then  I  would  pick  you  up,  of  all 
people,  with  these  two  arms  that  are  now  holding  this  paper  and 
set  you  above  my  head.  But  as  for  the  moment  nothing  indicates 
that  this  could  ever  happen,  I  must,  after  the  incident  of  today, 
expressly  send  you  away  from  me,  and  I  urgently  beg  you  neither 
to  visit  me  in  person,  nor  to  try  to  get  in  touch  with  me  either  by 
writing  or  through  intermediaries.  Against  my  wishes  you  de¬ 
cided  this  evening  to  leave  me;  stick,  then,  to  that  decision  all 
your  life.  Only  then  will  it  be  a  manly  decision.  As  the  bringer 
of  this  news  I  have  chosen  Mr  Green,  my  best  friend,  who  no 
doubt  will  find  indulgent  words  for  you  which  at  the  moment  are 
certainly  not  at  my  disposal.  He  is  an  influential  man  and,  if  only 
for  my  sake,  will  give  you  his  advice  and  help  in  the  first  inde¬ 
pendent  steps  which  you  take.  To  explain  our  separation,  which 
now  as  I  end  this  letter  once  more  seems  incomprehensible  to  me, 
I  have  to  keep  telling  myself  again  and  again,  Karl,  that  nothing 
good  comes  out  of  your  family.  If  Mr  Green  should  forget  to  hand 
you  your  box  and  umbrella,  remind  him  of  them. 

With  best  wishes  for  your  further  welfare, 

Your  faithful 

Uncle  Jacob 


'Are  you  finished?'  asked  Green. 

'Yes/  said  Karl.  'Have  you  brought  the  box  and  the  um¬ 
brella  with  you  ?  ’  he  asked. 

‘Here  it  is/  said  Green,  setting  Karl’s  old  travelling  box, 
which  until  now  he  had  held  in  his  left  hand  concealed 
behind  his  back,  beside  Karl  on  the  floor. 

‘And  the  umbrella  ? Karl  asked  again. 

‘Everything  here/  said  Green,  bringing  out  the  umbrella 


91 


too,  which  had  been  hanging  from  one  of  his  trouser  pockets. 
A  man  called  Schuhal,  an  engineer  in  the  Hamburg- 
American  Line,  brought  the  things;  he  maintained  that  he 
found  them  on  the  ship.  You  can  find  an  opportunity  to 
thank  him  sometime/ 

‘Now  I  have  my  old  things  back  again  at  least/  said  Karl, 
laying  the  umbrella  on  the  box. 

But  you  should  take  better  care  of  them  in  future,  the 
Senator  asked  me  to  tell  you/  said  Mr  Green,  and  then  asked, 
obviously  out  of  private  curiosity :  ‘What  queer  kind  of  box 
is  that?' 

‘It's  the  kind  of  box  that  soldiers  in  my  country  take  with 
them  when  they  join  the  army/  replied  Karl.  ‘It’s  my  father's 
old  army  chest.  It’s  very  useful  too/  he  added  with  a  smile, 
‘provided  you  don't  leave  it  behind  you  somewhere/ 

‘After  all,  you’ve  been  taught  your  lesson/  said  Mr  Green, 
‘and  I  bet  you  haven’t  a  second  uncle  in  America.  Here  is 
something  else  for  you,  a  third-class  ticket  to  San  Francisco. 
I’ve  decided  on  sending  you  there  because  in  the  first  place 
your  chances  of  earning  a  living  are  much  better  in  the  West, 
and  in  the  second  your  uncle  has  got  a  finger  in  everything 
here  that  might  suit  you  and  a  meeting  between  you  must 
be  strictly  avoided.  In  ’Frisco  you  can  tackle  anything  you 
like;  just  begin  at  the  bottom  and  trying  gradually  to  work 
your  way  up/ 

Karl  could  not  detect  any  malice  in  these  words;  the  bad 
news  which  had  lain  sheathed  in  Green  the  whole  evening 
was  delivered,  and  now  he  seemed  a  harmless  man  with 
whom  one  could  speak  more  frankly  perhaps,  than  with 
anybody  else.  The  best  of  men,  chosen  through  no  fault  of 
his  own  to  be  the  bearer  of  such  a  secret  and  painful  message, 
must  appear  a  suspicious  character  so  long  as  he  had  to  keep 
it  to  himself.  ‘I  shall  leave  this  house  at  once/  said  Karl, 
hoping  that  his  resolution  would  be  approved  by  Green’s 
experience,  ‘for  I  was  invited  as  my  uncle’s  nephew,  while  as 
a  stranger  I  have  no  business  here.  Would  you  be  so  good  as 

92 


to  show  me  the  way  out  and  tell  me  how  I  can  get  to  the 
nearest  inn?' 

‘As  quick  as  you  like/  said  Green,  ‘you're  not  afraid  of 
giving  me  trouble,  are  you  ? ' 

On  seeing  the  huge  strides  which  Green  was  taking,  Karl 
at  once  came  to  a  stop,*  so  much  haste  seemed  highly  sus¬ 
picious,  and  he  seized  Green  by  the  coat-tail,  suddenly 
realizing  the  true  situation,  and  said:  ‘There's  one  thing 
more  you  must  explain :  on  the  envelope  you  gave  me  it  was 
merely  stated  that  I  was  to  receive  it  at  midnight,  wherever 
I  might  be  found.  Why,  then,  on  the  strength  of  that  letter, 
did  you  keep  me  here  when  I  wanted  to  leave  at  a  quarter-past 
eleven  ?  In  doing  that  you  exceeded  your  instructions/ 

Green  accompanied  his  reply  with  a  wave  of  the  hand 
which  indicated  with  melodramatic  exaggeration  the  silliness 
of  Karl’s  question,  saying:  ‘Was  it  stated  on  the  envelope 
that  I  should  run  myself  to  death  chasing  about  after  you, 
and  did  the  contents  of  the  letter  give  any  hint  that  the 
inscription  was  to  be  construed  in  such  a  way?  If  I  had  not 
kept  you  here,  I  should  have  had  to  hand  you  the  letter 
precisely  at  midnight  on  the  open  road.' 

‘No/  said  Karl,  quite  unmoved,  ‘it  isn't  quite  so.  It  says 
on  the  envelope :  “To  be  delivered  at  midnight/'  You  might 
have  been  too  tired,  perhaps,  to  follow  me  at  all,  or  I  might 
have  reached  my  uncle's  by  midnight,  though  I  grant  you, 
Mr  Pollunder  thought  not,  or  as  a  last  resort  it  might  have 
been  your  duty  to  take  me  back  to  my  uncle  in  your  own 
car,  which  you  so  conveniently  forgot  to  mention,  since  I 
was  insisting  on  going  back.  Does  not  the  inscription  quite 
plainly  convey  that  midnight  was  to  be  the  final  term  for 
me?  And  it  is  you  who  are  to  blame  that  I  missed  it/ 

Kar]  looked  at  Green  with  shrewd  eyes  and  clearly  saw 
that  shame  over  this  exposure  was  conflicting  in  the  man 
with  joy  at  the  success  of  his  designs.  At  last  he  pulled  him¬ 
self  together  and  said  sharply,  as  if  breaking  into  Karl's 
accusations,  although  Karl  had  been  silent  for  a  long  time: 

93 


‘Not  a  word  more  P  And  pushed  Karl,  who  had  once  more 
picked  up  his  box  and  his  umbrella,  out  through  a  little  door 
which  he  flung  open  before  him. 

To  his  astonishment  Karl  found  himself  in  the  open  air. 
An  outside  stair  without  railings  led  downwards  before  him. 
He  had  simply  to  descend  it  and  then  turn  to  the  right  to 
reach  the  avenue  which  led  to  the  road.  In  the  bright  moon¬ 
light  he  could  not  miss  his  way.  Below  him  in  the  garden 
he  could  hear  the  manifold  barking  of  dogs  who  had  been  let 
loose  and  were  rushing  about  in  the  shadow  of  the  trees.  In 
the  stillness  he  could  distinctly  hear  them  thudding  on  the 
grass  as  they  landed  after  making  their  great  bounds. 

Without  being  molested  by  the  dogs  Karl  safely  got  out  of 
the  garden.  He  could  not  tell  with  certainty  in  which  direc¬ 
tion  New  York  lay.  In  coming  here  he  had  paid  too  little 
attention  to  details  which  might  have  been  useful  to  him 
now.  Finally  he  told  himself  that  he  need  not  of  necessity  go 
to  New  York,  where  nobody  expected  him  and  one  man  cer¬ 
tainly  did  not  expect  him.  So  he  chose  a  chance  direction 
and  set  out  on  his  way. 


4.  The  Road  to  Rameses 


In  the  small  inn  which  Karl  reached  after  a  short  walk  and 
which  was  merely  a  last  little  eating-house  for  New  York 
car  and  lorry  drivers  and  so  very  seldom  used  as  a  night 
lodging,  he  asked  for  the  cheapest  bed  that  could  be  had, 
since  he  thought  he  had  better  begin  to  save  at  once.  In 
keeping  with  his  request,  the  landlord  waved  him  up  a  stair 
as  if  he  were  a  menial,  and  at  the  top  of  the  stair  a  dishevelled 
old  hag,  peevish  at  being  roused  from  her  sleep,  received  him 
almost  without  listening  to  him,  warning  him  all  the  time 
to  tread  softly,  and  conducted  him  into  a  room  whose  door 
she  shut  on  him,  but  not  before  giving  him  a  whispered: 

<Hstr  '  '  H 

Karl  could  not  make  out  at  first  whether  the  window 
curtains  had  merely  been  drawn  or  whether  there  was  no 
window  in  the  room  at  all,  it  was  so  dark;  but  in  the  end  he 
noticed  a  skylight,  whose  covering  he  drew  aside,  whereupon 
a  little  light  came  in.  There  were  two  beds  in  the  room,  both 
of  them  already  occupied.  He  saw  two  young  men  lying 
there  in  a  heavy  sleep;  they  did  not  look  very  trustworthy, 
chiefly  because  without  any  understandable  reason  they 
were  sleeping  in  their  clothes;  one  of  them  actually  had  his 
boots  on. 

At  the  moment  when  Karl  uncovered  the  skylight  one  of 
the  sleepers  raised  his  arms  and  legs  a  little  way  in  the  air, 
which  was  such  a  curious  sight  that  in  spite  of  his  cares  Karl 
laughed  to  himself. 

He  soon  realized  that,  quite  apart  from  the  absence  of 
anything  to  sleep  on,  there  being  neither  a  couch  nor  a  sofa, 


95 


he  would  not  be  able  to  get  any  sleep  here,  since  be  could 
not  risk  losing  his  newly  recovered  box  and  the  money  he 
was  carrying  on  him.  But  he  did  not  want  to  go  away  either, 
for  he  did  not  know  how  he  was  to  get  past  the  old  woman 
and  the  landlord  if  he  left  the  house  so  soon.  After  all,  he 
was  perhaps  just  as  safe  here  as  on  the  open  road.  It  was 
certainly  strange  that  no  sign  of  luggage  was  to  be  seen  in 
the  whole  room,  so  far  as  he  could  make  out  in  the  half  light. 
But  perhaps,  indeed  very  probably,  the  two  young  men  were 
servants  who  had  to  get  up  early  because  of  the  boarders  and 
for  that  reason  slept  with  their  clothes  on.  In  that  case  it 
was  no  great  honour,  certainly,  to  sleep  in  their  room,  but  it 
was  all  the  less  risky.  Yet  he  must  not  fall  asleep  on  any 
account  until  he  was  certain  of  this  beyond  all  doubt. 

Under  the  bed  a  candle  was  standing,  along  with  matches. 
Karl  softly  crept  over  and  fetched  them.  He  had  no  scruples 
about  lighting  the  candle,  for  on  the  landlord’s  authority  the 
room  belonged  as  much  to  him  as  to  the  other  two  men,  who 
besides  had  already  enjoyed  half  a  night’s  sleep  and  being  in 
possession  of  the  beds  held  an  immeasurable  advantage  over 
him.  However,  by  moving  about  as  quietly  as  possible,  he 
naturally  took  every  care  not  to  waken  them. 

First  of  all  he  wanted  to  examine  his  box,  so  as  to  survey 
his  things,  of  which  by  this  time  he  had  only  a  vague 
memory,  and  the  most  precious  of  which  might  well  have 
disappeared.  For  once  Schubal  got  his  hands  on  anything 
there  was  little  hope  that  you  would  get  it  back  unscathed. 
Of  course,  he  might  have  been  counting  on  a  big  tip  from 
Uncle  Jacob,  but  on  the  other  hand  if  anything  were  missing, 
he  could  easily  shift  the  blame  on  to  the  original  guardian 
of  the  box,  Mr  Butterbaum. 

Karl’s  first  glance  inside  the  box  horrified  him.  How  many 
hours  had  he  spent  during  the  voyage  in  arranging  and  re¬ 
arranging  the  things  in  this  box,  and  now  everything  was  in 
such  wild  confusion  that  as  soon  as  he  turned  the  key  the 
lid  sprang  up  of  itself. 

96 


But  soon  he  realized  to  his  delight  that  the  sole  cause  of 
the  disorder  was  that  someone  had  added  the  suit  he  had 
worn  during  the  voyage,  which  the  box,  of  course,  was  not 
intended  to  hold.  Not  the  slightest  thing  was  missing.  In  the 
secret  pocket  of  his  jacket  he  found  not  only  his  passport  but 
also  the  money  which  his  parents  had  given  him,  so  that, 
including  what  he  had  upon  him,  he  was  amply  furnished 
with  money  for  the  time  being.  Even  the  underclothes  which 
he  had  worn  on  arriving  were  there,  freshly  washed  and 
ironed.  He  at  once  put  his  watch  and  his  money  in  the  trusty 
secret  pocket.  The  only  regrettable  thing  was  that  the 
Veronese  salami,  which  was  still  there  too,  had  bestowed  its 
smell  upon  everything  else.  If  he  could  not  find  some  way  of 
eliminating  that  smell,  he  had  every  prospect  of  walking 
about  for  months  enveloped  in  it. 

As  he  was  searching  for  some  things  at  the  very  bottom  - 
a  pocket  Bible,  some  letter  paper  and  some  photographs  of 
his  parents  -  the  cap  fell  from  his  head  into  the  box.  In  its 
old  surroundings  he  recognized  it  at  once;  it  was  his  own 
cap,  the  cap  which  his  mother  had  given  him  to  wear  during 
the  voyage.  All  the  same,  out  of  prudence  he  had  not  worn 
the  cap  on  the  boat,  for  he  knew  that  in  America  everybody 
wore  caps  instead  of  hats,  so  that  he  did  not  want  to  wear 
his  cap  out  before  arriving.  And  Mr  Green  had  used  it  simply 
to  make  a  fool  of  him.  Could  Uncle  Jacob  have  instructed 
him  to  do  that  as  well?  And  with  an  involuntary  wrathful 
movement  he  gripped  the  lid  of  the  box,  which  shut  with 
a  bang. 

Now  there  was  no  help  for  it;  the  two  sleepers  were 
aroused.  First  one  of  them  stretched  and  yawned,  and  then 
the  other  immediately  followed  suit.  Almost  all  the  contents 
of  the  box  were  lying  in  a  heap  on  the  table;  if  these  men 
were  thieves,  they  merely  had  to  walk  across  the  room  and 
take  what  they  fancied.  Both  to  forestall  this  possibility  and 
to  know  where  he  stood,  Karl  went 'over  with  the  candle  in 
his  hand  to  the  beds  and  explained  how  he  happened  to  be 

a. -5 


97 


there.  They  did  not  seem  to  have  expected  any  explanation, 
for,  still  far  too  sleepy  to  talk,  they  merely  gazed  at  him 
without  any  sign  of  surprise.  They  were  both  young  men, 
but  heavy  work  or  poverty  had  prematurely  sharpened  the 
bones  of  their  faces;  unkempt  beards  hung  from  their  chins; 
their  hair,  which  had  not  been  cut  for  a  long  time,  lay  matted 
on  their  heads;  and  they  rubbed  and  knuckled  their  deep-set 
eyes,  still  heavy  with  sleep. 

Karl  resolved  to  take  every  advantage  of  their  momentary 
weakness  and  so  he  said :  ‘My  name  is  Karl  Rossmann  and  I 
am  a  German.  Please  tell  me,  as  we  are  occupying  the  same 
room,  what  your  names  are  and  what  country  you  came 
from.  I  may  as  well  say  that  I  don’t  expect  a  share  of  your 
beds,  for  I  was  late  in  arriving  and  in  any  case  I  have  no 
intention  of  sleeping.  And  you  mustn’t  draw  the  wrong 
conclusions  from  the  good  suit  I  have  on;  I  am  quite  poor 
and  without  any  prospects.’ 

The  smaller  of  the  two  men  -  the  one  with  his  boots  on  - 
indicating  by  his  arms,  legs  and  general  demeanour  that  he 
was  not  interested  in  all  this  and  had  no  time  for  such  re¬ 
marks,  lay  down  again  and  immediately  went  to  sleep;  the 
other,  a  dark-skinned  man,  also  lay  down  again,  but  before 
falling  asleep  said  with  a  languid  wave  of  the  hand:  That 
chap  there  is  called  Robinson,  and  he’s  an  Irishman,  I’m 
called  Delamarche  and  I’m  a  Frenchman,  and  now  please  be 
quiet.’  Scarcely  had  he  said  this  when  with  a  great  puff  he 
blew  out  Karl's  candle  and  fell  back  on  the  pillow. 

‘Well,  that  danger  is  averted  for  the  moment,'  Karl  told 
himself,  turning  back  to  the  table.  If  their  sleepiness  was  not 
a  pretext,  everything  was  all  right.  The  only  disagreeable 
thing  was  that  one  of  them  was  an  Irishman.  Karl  could  no 
longer  remember  in  what  book  he  had  once  read  at  home  that 
if  you  went  to  America  you  must  be  on  your  guard  against 
the  Irish.  While  he  was  staying  with  his  uncle  he  certainly 
had  had  an  excellent  opportunity  to  go  thoroughly  into  the 
question  of  the  Irish  danger,  but  because  he  believed  he  was 

98 


now  well  provided  for  to  the  end  of  his  life  he  had  completely 
neglected  it.  So  he  resolved  that  he  would  at  least  have  a 
good  look  at  this  Irishman  by  the  help  of  the  candle,  which 
he  lit  again,  and  found  that  the  man  really  looked  more 
bearable  than  the  Frenchman.  His  cheeks  had  still  a  trace  of 
roundness  and  he  smiled  in  his  sleep  in  quite  a  friendly  way, 
so  far  as  Karl  could  make  out,  standing  at  a  distance  on 
tiptoe. 

Firmly  resolved  in  spite  of  everything  not  to  go  to  sleep, 
Karl  sat  down  on  the  only  chair  in  the  room,  postponed 
packing  his  box  for  the  time  being,  since*  the  whole  night 
still  lay  before  him  in  which  to  do  it,  and  turned  the  leaves 
of  his  Bible  for  a  little  while,  without  reading  anything. 
Then  he  took  up  a  photograph  of  his  parents,  in  which  his 
small  father  stood  very  erect  behind  his  mother,  who  sat  in 
an  easy-chair  slightly  sunk  into  herself.  One  of  his  father’s 
hands  lay  on  the  back  of  the  chair,  the  other,  which  was 
clenched  to  a  fist,  rested  on  a  picture-book  lying  open  on  a 
fragile  table  beside  him.  There  was  another  photograph  in 
which  Karl  had  been  included  together  with  his  parents.  In 
it  his  father  and  mother  were  eyeing  him  sharply,  while  he 
was  staring  at  the  camera,  as  the  photographer  bade  him. 
But  he  had  not  taken  this  photograph  with  him  on  the 
voyage. 

He  gazed  all  the  more  attentively  now  at  the  one  lying 
before  him  and  tried  to  catch  his  father’s  eye  from  various 
angles.  But  his  father  refused  to  come  to  life,  no  matter  how 
much  his  expression  was  modified  by  shifting  the  candle  into 
different  positions;  nor  did  his  thick,  horizontal  moustache 
look  in  the  least  real;  it  was  not  a  good  photograph.  His 
mother,  however,  had  come  out  better;  her  mouth  was 
twisted  as  if  she  had  been  hurt  and  were  forcing  herself  to 
smile.  It  seemed  to  Karl  that  anyone  who  saw  the  photograph 
must  be  so  forcibly  struck  with  this  that  he  would  begin 
immediately  to  think  it  an  exaggerated,  not  to  say  foolish, 
interpretation.  How  could  a  photograph  convey  with  such 

99 


complete  certainty  the  secret  feelings  of  the  person  shown 
in  it?  And  he  looked  away  from  the  photograph  for  a  little 
while.  When  he  glanced  at  it  again  he  noticed  his  mother’s 
hand,  which  dropped  from  the  arm  of  the  chair  in  the  fore¬ 
ground,  near  enough  to  kiss.  He  wondered  if  it  might  not  be 
better  to  wnte  to  his  parents,  as  both  of  them  (and  his  father 
very  strictly  on  leaving  him  at  Hamburg)  had  enjoined  him. 
On  that  terrible  evening  when  his  mother,  standing  by  the 
window,  had  told  him  he  was  to  go  to  America,  he  had  made 
a  fixed  resolution  never  to  write;  but  what  did  the  resolve  of 
an  inexperienced  boy  matter  here,  in  these  new  surround¬ 
ings?  He  might  as  well  have  vowed  then  that  two  months 
in  America  would  see  him  commanding  the  American 
Militia,  instead  of  which  here  he  was  in  a  garret  beside  two 
vagrants,  in  an  eating-house  outside  New  York,  the  right 
place  for  him,  too,  as  he  could  not  but  admit.  And  with  a 
smile  he  scrutinized  his  parents’  faces,  as  if  to  read  in  them 
whether  they  still  wanted  to  hear  news  of  their  son. 

Thus  preoccupied,  he  soon  became  aware  that  he  was  very 
tired  after  all  and  would  scarcely  manage  to  keep  awake  all 
night.  The  photograph  fell  from  his  hands,  and  he  laid  his 
face  on  it,  finding  the  coolness  pleasant  to  his  cheek;  and 
with  a  comfortable  feeling  he  fell  asleep. 

He  was  awakened  early  in  the  morning  by  someone 
tickling  him  under  the  armpit.  It  was  the  Frenchman  who 
had  taken  that  liberty.  But  the  Irishman  too  was  standing 
beside  Karl’s  table,  and  both  were  staring  at  him  with  no 
less  interest  than  he  had  shown  in  them  during  the  night. 
Karl  was  not  surprised  that  in  getting  up  they  had  not 
wakened  him;  there  was  no  need  to  impute  evil  intentions  to 
their  stealthy  movements,  for  he  had  been  sleeping  heavily, 
and  they  had  not  had  much  to  do  in  the  way  of  dressing,  or, 
from  all  appearances  of  washing  either. 

Now  they  introduced  themselves  properly,  with  a  certain 
formality,  and  Karl  learned  that  they  were  both  mechanics 
who  had  been  out  of  work  for  a  long  time  in  New  York  and 


100 


so  had  come  down  in  the  world  considerably.  In  proof  of  this 
Robinson  unbuttoned  his  jacket  to  show  that  he  had  no  shirt 
on,  but  one  might  have  guessed  that  from  the  loose  fit  of  the 
collar  which  was  merely  fastened  to  the  neck  of  his  jacket. 
They  were  making  their  way  to  the  little  town  of  Butterford, 
two  days  on  foot  from  New  York,  where  it  was  rumoured 
that  work  was  to  be  had.  They  had  no  objection  to  Karl’s 
accompanying  them,  and  promised  to  take  turns  at  carrying 
his  box,  and  also,  if  they  got  work  themselves,  to  find  him  a 
job  as  an  apprentice,  an  easy  matter  when  work  was  to  be 
had  at  all.  Karl  had  scarcely  agreed  to  this  when  they  advised 
him  in  a  friendly  manner  to  get  out  of  his  good  suit,  which 
would  only  be  a  hindrance  to  him  in  looking  for  a  job.  In 
that  very  house  there  was  an  excellent  chance  to  dispose  of 
the  suit,  for  the  old  woman  dealt  in  old  clothes.  They  helped 
Karl,  who  had  not  yet  quite  decided  what  to  do  about  the 
suit,  to  take  it  off,  and  then  they  carried  it  away.  Left  to 
himself  Karl,  still  heavy  with  sleep,  slowly  put  on  his  old 
travelling  suit,  reproaching  himself  meanwhile  for  having 
sold  the  good  one,  which  might  perhaps  hinder  him  from 
getting  an  apprentice’s  job  but  would  be  a  good  recommenda¬ 
tion  in  looking  for  a  better  situation,  and  he  had  just  opened 
the  door  to  call  the  two  men  back  when  he  met  them  face  to 
face,  furnished  with  half  a  dollar  which  they  laid  on  the 
table  as  the  proceeds  of  the  sale,  looking  at  the  same  time  so 
gleeful  that  it  was  difficult  to  believe  they  had  not  raked  off 
a  profit  for  themselves  -  and  a  disgustingly  big  profit,  too. 

But  there  was  not  time  to  tell  them  off  about  that,  for  the 
old  woman  came  in,  just  as  sleepy  as  she  had  been  the  night 
before,  and  drove  all  three  of  them  out  into  the  passage  with 
the  explanation  that  the  room  had  to  be  got  ready  for  new 
occupants.  There  was  no  question  of  that,  needless  to  say; 
she  did  it  out  of  mere  malice.  Karl,  who  had  started  to  pack 
his  box,  had  to  look  on  while  she  grabbed  his  things  with 
both  hands  and  flung  them  into  the  box  with  such  violence 
that  they  might  have  been  wild  animals  she  was  determined 


101 


to  master.  The  two  mechanics  kept  dodging  round  her,  tug¬ 
ging  at  her  skirt,  clapping  her  on  the  back,  but  if  they  fancied 
they  were  helping  Karl  at  all  they  were  quite  mistaken. 
When  the  old  woman  had  shut  the  box,  she  thrust  the  handle 
into  Karl's  fingers,  shook  off  the  mechanics,  and  drove  all 
three  from  the  room  with  the  threat  that  if  they  did  not  get 
out  there  would  be  no  coffee  for  them.  Obviously  she  had 
quite  forgotten  that  Karl  had  not  been  with  the  mechanics 
from  the  start,  for  she  lumped  the  three  of  them  together. 
After  all,  the  mechanics  had  sold  her  Karl's  suit,  which 
argued  a  certain  solidarity. 

They  had  to  walk  up  and  down  the  passage  for  a  long 
time,  and  the  Frenchman,  who  had  taken  Karl  by  the  arm, 
swore  with  great  fluency,  threatening  to  knock  down  the 
landlord  if  he  dared  to  show  himself  and  furiously  beating 
his  clenched  fists  together  as  if  in  preparation  for  the  en¬ 
counter.  At  last  an  innocent  little  boy  appeared,  who  was  so 
small  that  he  had  to  stand  on  tiptoe  to  hand  the  coffee-can 
to  the  Frenchman.  Unluckily  there  was  nothing  but  a  can, 
and  they  could  not  make  the  boy  understand  that  glasses 
were  also  needed.  So  only  one  of  them  could  drink  at  a  time, 
while  the  other  two  stood  by  and  waited.  Karl  could  not 
bring  himself  to  drink  coffee  in  this  way,  but  he  did  not 
want  to  offend  the  other  two,  and  so,  when  his  turn  came, 
though  he  raised  the  can  to  his  lips  he  drank  nothing. 

As  a  parting  gesture  the  Irishman  flung  the  can  on  the 
stone  flags.  Observed  by  no  one,  they  left  the  house  and 
stepped  out  into  the  thick,  yellowish  morning  mist.  They 
walked  on  in  silence  side  by  side  at  the  edge  of  the  road;  Karl 
had  to  carry  his  box,  since  the  others  were  not  likely  to 
relieve  him  unless  he  asked  them.  Now  and  then  an  auto¬ 
mobile  shot  out  of  the  mist  and  all  three  turned  their  heads 
to  gaze  after  the  large  monsters,  which  were  so  remarkable 
to  look  at  and  passed  so  quickly  that  they  never  even  noticed 
whether  anyone  was  sitting  inside.  Later  they  began  to  meet 
columns  of  vehicles  bringing  provisions  to  New  York,  which 


102 


streamed  past  in  live  rows  taking  up  the  whole  breadth  of 
the  road  and  so  continuously  that  no  one  could  have  got 
across  to  the  other  side.  At  intervals  the  road  widened  into 
a  kind  of  a  square,  in  the  middle  of  which  rose  a  structure  like 
a  tower,  where  a  policeman  was  stationed  to  supervise  every¬ 
thing,  directing  with  a  little  staff  the  traffic  of  the  main  road 
and  of  the  adjoining  side  roads,  the  only  supervision  the 
traffic  received  until  it  reached  the  next  square  and  the  next 
policeman,  although  meanwhile  it  was  adequately  and 
gratuitously  controlled  by  the  silent  vigilance  of  the  lorry- 
men  and  chauffeurs.  Karl  was  surprised  most  of  all  by  the 
general  quiet.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  bellowing  of  the  care¬ 
less  cattle  bound  for  the  slaughter-house,  you  would  probably 
have  heard  nothing  but  the  clatter  of  hoofs  and  the  whirring 
of  motor  vehicles.  Of  course  the  speed  at  which  they  went 
was  not  always  the  same.  At  some  of  the  squares,  because  of 
a  great  rush  of  traffic  from  the  side  roads,  large-scale  adjust¬ 
ments  had  to  be  made  and  then  whole  rows  of  vehicles  came 
to  a  standstill,  jerking  forward  by  inches,  but  after  that  for  a 
little  while  everything  would  fly  past  at  lightning  speed 
again  until,  as  if  governed  by  a  single  brake,  the  traffic  slowed 
down  once  moie.  And  yet  no  trace  of  dust  rose  from  the 
road;  all  this  speeding  went  on  in  perfectly  limpid  air.  There 
were  no  pedestrians,  no  market  women  straggling  singly 
along  the  road  towards  the  town,  as  in  Karl's  country,  but 
every  now  and  then  appeared  great,  flat  motor-trucks,  on 
which  stood  some  twenty  women  with  baskets  on  their  backs, 
perhaps  market  women  after  all,  craning  their  necks  to  over¬ 
see  the  traffic  in  their  impatience  for  a  quicker  journey. 
There  were  also  similar  trucks  on  which  a  few  men  lounged 
about  with  their  hands  in  their  trousers  pockets.  These  trucks 
all  bore  different  inscriptions,  and  on  one  of  them  Karl  read 
with  an  ejaculation  of  surprise:  ‘Dock  labourers  wanted  by 
the  Jacob  Despatch  Agency.'  The  truck  happened  to  be  going 
rather  slowly  and  a  lively  little  stoOp-shouldered  man  stand¬ 
ing  on  the  step  invited  the  three  wanderers  to  hop  in.  Karl 

103 


dodged  behind  the  mechanics,  as  if  his  uncle  were  on  the 
truck  and  might  catch  sight  of  him.  He  was  glad  that  his 
two  companions  refused  the  invitation,  though  he  found 
some  grounds  for  offence  in  the  scornful  way  they  did  so. 
They  had  no  business  to  think  they  were  too  good  to  work 
for  his  uncle.  He  immediately  let  them  know  it,  though  not 
of  course  in  so  many  words.  Delamarche  turned  on  him  and 
told  him  not  to  interfere  in  things  which  he  did  not  under¬ 
stand;  this  way  of  taking  on  men  was  a  scandalous  fraud 
and  the  firm  of  Jacob  was  notorious  throughout  the  whole 
United  States.  Karl  made  no  reply,  but  from  that  moment 
kept  close  to  the  Irishman  and  begged  him  to  carry  the  box 
for  a  little  while,  which  he  actually  did,  after  Karl  had  asked 
him  several  times.  But  he  kept  grumbling  about  the  weight 
of  the  box,  until  it  turned  out  that  all  he  wanted  was  to 
relieve  it  of  the  Veronese  salami,  to  which  it  seemed  he  had 
taken  a  fancy  before  he  left  the  inn.  Karl  had  to  unpack  it, 
but  the  Frenchman  grabbed  it  and,  with  a  knife  somewhat 
like  a  dagger,  sliced  it  up  and  ate  almost  the  whole  of  it 
himself.  Robinson  got  only  a  piece  now  and  then  and  Karl, 
who  had  been  forced  to  carry  the  box  again,  seeing  that  he 
did  not  want  to  leave  it  standing  on  the  road,  got  nothing 
at  all,  as  if  he  had  had  his  share  beforehand.  It  seemed  too 
silly  to  beg  for  a  piece,  but  he  began  to  feel  bitter. 

The  mist  had  already  vanished;  in  the  distance  gleamed  a 
high  mountain,  which  receded  in  wave-like  ridges  towards  a 
still  more  distant  summit,  veiled  in  a  sunlit  haze.  By  the  side 
of  the  road  were  badly  tilled  fields  clustered  round  big 
factories  which  rose  up  blackened  with  smoke  in  the  open 
country.  Isolated  blocks  of  tenements  were  set  down  at  ran¬ 
dom,  and  their  countless  windows  quivered  with  manifold 
movement  and  light,  while  on  all  the  flimsy  little  balconies 
women  and  children  were  busy  in  numberless  ways,  half 
concealed  and  half  revealed  by  washing  of  all  kinds,  hung 
up  or  spread  out  to  dry,  which  fluttered  around  them  in  the 
morning  wind  and  billowed  mightily.  If  one’s  eyes  strayed 

104 


from  the  houses  one  saw  larks  high  in  the  heavens  and  lower 
down  the  swallows,  darting  not  very  far  above  the  heads  of 
the  wayfarers. 

There  was  much  that  reminded  Karl  of  his  home,  and  he 
could  not  decide  whether  he  was  doing  well  in  leaving  New 
York  and  going  into  the  interior.  New  York  had  the  sea, 
which  meant  the  opportunity  to  return  at  any  moment  to 
his  own  country.  And  so  he  came  to  a  standstill  and  said  to 
his  two  companions  that  he  felt  like  going  back  to  New  York 
after  all.  And  when  Delamarche  simply  made  as  if  to  drive 
him  on,  he  refused  to  be  driven  and  protested  that  it  was  his 
business  to  decide  for  himself.  The  Irishman  had  to  intervene 
and  explain  that  Butterford  was  a  much  finer  place  than 
New  York,  and  both  had  to  coax  him  insistently  for  a  while 
before  he  would  go  on  again.  And  even  then  he  would  not 
have  consented  had  he  not  told  himself  that  it  would  prob¬ 
ably  be  better  for  him  to  reach  a  place  where  it  would  not  be 
so  easy  to  think  of  returning  home.  He  would  certainly 
work  and  push  his  fortune  all  the  better  there,  if  he  were 
not  hindered  by  idle  thoughts  of  home. 

And  now  it  was  he  who  led  the  two  others,  and  they  were 
so  delighted  by  his  enthusiasm  that,  without  even  being 
asked,  they  carried  the  box  in  turns  and  Karl  simply  could  not 
make  out  in  what  way  he  had  caused  them  such  happiness. 
They  npw  came  to  rising  country,  and  when  they  stopped 
here  and  there  they  could  see  on  looking  back  the  panorama 
of  New  York  and  its  harbour,  extending  more  and  more 
spaciously  below  them.  The  bridge  connecting  New  York 
with  Brooklyn  hung  delicately  over  the  East  River,  and  if 
one  half-shut  one’s  eyes  it  seemed  to  tremble.  It  appeared  to 
be  quite  bare  of  traffic,  and  beneath  it  stretched  a  smooth 
empty  tongue  of  water.  Both  the  huge  cities  seemed  to  stand 
there  empty  and  purposeless.  As  for  the  houses,  it  was 
scarcely  possible  to  distinguish  the  large  ones  from  the  small. 
In  the  invisible  depths  of  the  streets  life  probably  went  on 
after  its  own. fashion,  but  above  them  nothing  was  discernible 

105 


save  a  light  fume,  which  though  it  never  moved  seemed  the 
easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  dispel.  Even  to  the  harbour,  the 
greatest  in  the  world,  peace  had  returned,  and  only  now  and 
then,  probably  influenced  by  some  memory  of  an  earlier  view 
close  at  hand,  did  one  fancy  that  one  saw  a  ship  cutting  the 
water  for  a  little  distance.  But  one  could  not  follow  it  for 
long;  it  escaped  one’s  eyes  and  was  no  more  to  be  found. 

Delamarche  and  Robinson  clearly  saw  much  more;  they 
pointed  to  right  and  left  and  their  outstretched  hands 
gestured  over  squares  and  gardens  which  they  named  by 
their  names.  They  could  not  understand  how  Karl  could  stay 
for  two  months  in  New  York  and  yet  see  hardly  anything 
of  the  city  but  one  street.  And  they  promised,  when  they 
had  made  enough  money  in  Butterford,  to  take  him  to  New 
York  with  them  and  show  him  all  the  sights  worth  seeing, 
above  all,  of  course,  the  places  where  you  could  enjoy  your¬ 
self  to  your  heart’s  content.  Thinking  that,  Robinson  began 
to  sing  at  the  top  of  his  voice  a  song  which  Delamarche 
accompanied  by  clapping  his  hands;  Karl  recognized  it  as  an 
operatic  melody  of  his  own  country,  which  pleased  him 
more  in  the  English  version  than  it  had  ever  pleased  him  at 
home.  So  there  followed  a  little  open-air  concert,  in  which 
all  took  part;  though  the  city  at  their  feet,  which  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  enjoy  that  melody  so  much,  remained  apparently 
indifferent. 

Once  Karl  asked  where  Jacob’s  Despatch  Agency  lay,  and 
Delamarche  and  Robinson  at  once  stabbed  the  air  with  their 
forefingers,  indicating  perhaps  the  same  point  and  perhaps 
points  miles  asunder.  When  they  went  on  again,  Karl  asked 
how  soon  they  would  be  able  to  return  to  New  York  if  they 
got  good  jobs?  Delamarche  said  they  could  easily  do  it  in  a 
month,  for  there  was  a  scarcity  of  labour  in  Butterford  and 
wages  were  high.  Of  course  they  would  put  their  money  into 
a  common  fund,  so  that  chance  differences  in  their  earnings 
might  be  equalized  as  among  friends.  The  common  fund  did 
not  appeal  to  Karl,  although  as  an  apprentice  he  would 

106 


naturally  earn  less  than  a  skilled  worker.  In  any  case,  Robin¬ 
son  went  on,  if  there  was  no  work  in  Butterford  they  would 
of  course  have  to  wander  farther  and  either  get  jobs  as 
workers  on  the  land,  or  perhaps  try  panning  for  gold  in 
California,  which,  to  judge  from  Robinson's  circumstantial 
tales,  was  the  plan  that  appealed  to  him  most. 

‘But  why  did  you  turn  mechanic  if  you  want  to  go  looking 
for  gold?’  asked  Karl,  who  was  reluctant  to  admit  the  neces¬ 
sity  for  more  distant  and  uncertain  journeys. 

‘Why  a  mechanic?'  said  Robinson.  ‘Certainly  not  to  let 
my  mother's  son  die  of  hunger.  There's  big  money  in  the 
gold-fields.' 

‘Was  at  one  time,’  said  Delamarche. 

‘Still  is,'  said  Robinson,  and  he  told  of  countless  people  he 
knew  who  had  grown  rich  there,  who  were  still  there,  but  of 
course  did  not  need  to  lift  a  finger  now,  yet  for  old  friend¬ 
ship’s  sake  would  help  him  to  wealth  and  any  friends  of  his 
too,  naturally. 

‘We’ll  squeeze  jobs  out  of  Butterford  all  right,'  said  Dela¬ 
marche,  and  in  saying  this  he  uttered  Karl’s  dearest  wish; 
yet  it  could  hardly  be  called  a  confident  statement. 

During  the  day  they  stopped  only  once  at  an  eating-house, 
and  in  front  of  it  in  the  open  air,  at  a  table  which  to  Karl’s 
eyes  seemed  to  be  made  of  iron,  ate  almost  raw  flesh  which 
could  not  be  cut  but  only  hacked  with  their  knives  and 
forks.  The  bread  was  baked  in  a  cylindrical  shape  and  in  each 
of  the  loaves  was  stuck  a  long  knife.  With  this  meal  a  black 
liquor  was  supplied,  which  burnt  one’s  *  throat.  But  Dela¬ 
marche  and  Robinson  liked  it;  they  kept  raising  their  glasses 
to  the  fulfilment  of  various  toasts,  clinking  them  together 
high  in  the  air  for  a  minute  at  a  time.  At  a  neighbouring 
table  workmen  in  lime-stained  blouses  were  sitting,  all  drink¬ 
ing  the  same  liquor.  Cars  passing  in  great  numbers  flung 
swathes  of  dust  over  the  table.  Enormous  newspapers  were 
being  handed  round  and  there  was  excited  talk  of  a  strike 
among  the  building  workers:  the  name  Mack  was  often 


107 


mentioned.  Karl  inquired  regarding  him  and  learned  that  he 
was  the  father  of  the  Mack  he  knew,  and  the  greatest  building 
contractor  in  New  York.  The  strike  was  supposed  to  be 
costing  him  millions  and  possibly  endangering  his  financial 
position.  Karl  did  not  believe  a  word  of  what  was  said  by 
these  badly  informed  and  spiteful  people. 

The  meal  was  spoiled  even  more  for  Karl  by  the  doubt  in 
his  mind  how  it  was  going  to  be  paid  for.  The  natural  thing 
would  have  been  for  each  to  pay  his  shot,  but  both  Dela- 
marche  and  Robinson  casually  remarked  that  the  price  of 
their  last  night's  lodging  had  emptied  their  pockets.  Watch, 
ring  or  anything  else  that  could  be  sold,  was  to  be  seen  on 
neither  of  them.  And  Karl  could  hardly  point  out  that  they 
had  lined  their  pockets  over  the  sale  of  his  suit;  that  would 
be  an  insult,  and  good-bye  for  ever.  But  the  astonishing  thing 
was  that  neither  Delamarche  nor  Robinson  bothered  them¬ 
selves  about  the  payment;  on  the  contrary  they  were  in  such 
good  spirits  that  they  kept  trying  to  make  up  to  the  waitress, 
who  moved  with  heavy  stateliness  from  table  to  table.  Her 
hair  was  loosened  at  the  sides  and  tumbled  over  her  brow 
and  cheeks;  she  kept  putting  it  back  by  pushing  it  up  with 
her  hand.  At  last,  just  when  they  thought  they  were  going 
to  get  a  friendly  word  from  her,  she  came  up  to  their  table, 
planted  both  hands  on  it  and  asked:  ‘Who  is  paying?'  Never 
did  hands  shoot  out  more  quickly  than  those  of  Delamarche 
and  Robinson  as  they  pointed  at  Karl.  Karl  was  not  taken 
aback,  for  he  had  foreseen  this,  and  he  saw  no  harm  in  paying 
a  trifling  bill  for  his  comrades,  from  whom  he  expected 
assistance  in  turn,  although  it  would  certainly  have  been 
more  decent  of  them  to  discuss  the  matter  frankly  before  the 
crucial  moment.  All  that  troubled  him  was  that  he  would 
first  have  to  fish  the  money  out  of  the  secret  pocket.  His 
original  intention  had  been  to  save  up  his  money  in  case  of 
extreme  need  and  for  the  time  being  to  put  himself,  as  it 
were,  on  a  level  with  his  friends.  The  advantage  which  he 
held  over  them  through  possessing  that  money  and  above  all 

108 


through  concealing  it  was  easily  outweighed  by  the  fact  that 
they  had  lived  in  America  since  their  childhood,  that  they 
had  ample  skill  and  experience  for  wage-earning,  and  finally 
that  they  were  not  accustomed  to  anything  better  than  their 
present  circumstances.  Karl’s  original  intention  to  save  his 
money,  then,  need  not  be  affected  by  his  paying  the  bill  now, 
since  after  all  he  could  spare  a  quarter  of  a  dollar;  he  could 
simply  lay  a  quarter  on  the  table  and  tell  them  that  that  was 
all  he  had,  and  that  he  was  willing  to  part  with  it  to  get 
them  all  to  Butterford.  For  a  journey  on  foot  a  quarter  should 
be  ample.  But  he  did  not  know  whether  he  had  enough  small 
change,  and  anyhow  his  change  was  beside  the  wad  of  bank¬ 
notes  in  the  recesses  of  his  secret  pocket,  where  it  was  difficult 
to  get  hold  of  anything  without  emptying  the  whole  lot 
on  to  the  table.  Besides,  it  was  quite  unnecessary  for  his 
companions  to  know  anything  about  the  secret  pocket  at  all. 
By  good  luck,  however,  his  friends  seemed  to  be  much  more 
interested  in  the  waitress  than  in  how  Karl  was  to  produce 
the  money  for  the  bill.  Delamarche,  under  cover  of  asking 
her  to  make  out  the  bill,  had  lured  her  in  between  himself 
and  Robinson,  an.d  the  only  way  in  which  she  could  repel 
their  familiarities  was  by  pushing  their  faces  away  with  the 
flat  of  her  hand.  Meantime,  sweating  with  the  effort,  Karl 
gathered  in  one  hand  under  the  table  the  money  he  felt  for 
and  extracted,  coin  by  coin,  from  the  secret  pocket  with  the 
other.  At  long  last,  although  he  was  not  yet  familiar  with 
American  money,  he  judged  that  he  had  enough  small  coins 
to  make  up  the  sum  and  laid  them  all  on  the  table.  The  clink 
of  money  at  once  put  an  end  to  all  by-play.  To  Karl’s  annoy¬ 
ance  and  to  the  general  surprise  it  turned  out  that  almost  a 
whole  dollar  was  lying  there.  No  one  asked  why  Karl  had 
said  nothing  about  this  money,  which  would  have  been 
sufficient  for  a  comfortable  railway  journey  to  Butterford; 
yet  Karl  felt  deeply  embarrassed  all  the  same.  After  paying 
the  bill,  he  slowly  pocketed  the  coins  again,  but  from  his 
very  fingers  Delamarche  snatched  one  of  them,  as  a  special 

109 


tip  for  the  waitress,  whom  he  embraced  ardently  with  one 
hand  while  giving  her  the  coin  with  the  other. 

Karl  felt  grateful  to  them  for  not  saying  anything  about 
his  money  as  they  walked  away  together,  and  for  a  while  he 
actually  considered  confessing  his  whole  wealth  to  them,  but 
then  refrained,  as  he  could  not  find  a  suitable  opportunity. 
Towards  evening  they  came  to  a  more  rustic,  fertile  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  All  around  they  could  see  endless  fields  stretching 
across  gentle  hills  in  their  first  green;  rich  country  villas 
bordered  the  road  on  either  side,  and  for  hours  they  walked 
between  gilded  garden  railings;  several  times  they  crossed 
the  same  slow  stream,  and  often  they  heard  above  them  trains 
thundering  over  the  lofty  viaducts. 

The  sun  was  just  setting  behind  the  level  edge  of  distant 
woods  when  they  mounted  a  gentle  rise  crowned  with  a 
clump  of  trees  and  flung  themselves  on  the  grass  so  as  to 
rest  from  their  travels.  Delamarche  and  Robinson  lay  flat 
and  stretched  themselves  mightily.  Karl  sat  up  and  gazed  at 
the  road  a  few  yards  below,  on  which  motor-cars  flew  lightly 
past  one  another  as  they  had  done  the  whole  day,  as  if  a 
certain  number  of  them  were  always  being  despatched  from 
some  distant  place  and  the  same  number  were  being  awaited 
in  another  place  equally  distant.  During  the  whole  day 
since  early  morning  Karl  had  seen  not  a  single  car  stopping, 
not  a  single  passenger  getting  out. 

Robinson  proposed  that  they  should  spend  the  night  here, 
since  they  were  all  very  tired  and  would  be  able  to  start  all 
the  earlier  in  the  morning;  besides,  they  would  scarcely  find 
a  cheaper  and  more  suitable  place  to  spend  the  night  before 
complete  darkness  fell.  Delamarche  was  of  the  same  mind, 
but  Karl  felt  obliged  to  remark  that  he  had  enough  money 
to  pay  for  a  night's  lodgings  for  them  all  in  some  hotel. 
Delamarche  replied  that  they  might  still  need  the  money; 
better  to  save  it  for  the  present.  He  made  no  concealment  of 
the  fact  that  they  were  counting  on  Karl's  money.  As  his 
first  proposal  had  been  accepted,  Robinson  went  on  to  suggest 


no 


that  before  going  to  sleep  they  should  have  a  good  meal  to 
strengthen  them  for  the  morning,  and  that  one  of  them 
should  fetch  food  for  all  three  from  the  hotel  close  by  on  the 
main  road,  which  bore  the  lighted  sign :  ‘Hotel  Occidental'. 
As  he  was  the  youngest  and  nobody  else  offered  to  go,  Karl 
had  no  hesitation  in  volunteering  for  the  job,  and  after  the 
others  had  announced  that  they  wanted  bacon,  bread  and 
beer,  he  went  arross  to  the  hotel. 

It  seemed  that  they  must  be  near  a  big  town,  for  the  very 
first  room  of  the  hotel  that  Karl  entered  was  filled  with  a 
noisy  crowd,,  and  at  the  buffet,  which  ran 'along  the  whole 
length  and  two  sides  of  the  room,  a  host  of  waiters  with 
white  aprons  kept  rushing  about  yet  could  not  satisfy  their 
impatient  customers,  for  loud  cursing  and  the  pounding  of 
fists  on  tables  sounded  unceasingly  from  all  quarters.  No  one 
paid  any  attention  to  Karl;  in  the  body  of  the  saloon  itself 
there  was  no  service;  the  customers,  crowded  at  tiny  tables 
scarcely  big  enough  for  three  people,  had  to  fetch  everything 
they  wanted  from  the  buffet.  On  each  table  stood  a  big  bottle 
of  oil,  vinegar  or  something  of  the  kind,  and  all  the  food  that 
was  brought  from  the  buffet  was  liberally  dosed  from  the 
bottle  before  being  eaten.  If  Karl  was  to  reach  the  buffet  at 
all,  where  his.  real  difficulties  would  probably  begin  because 
of  the  huge  crowd  standing  at  it,  he  would  have  to  squeeze 
his  way  between  the  countless  tables,  and  this  of  course,  in 
spite  of  every  care,  could  not  be  done  without  rudely  disturb¬ 
ing  the  customers,  who,  however,  accepted  every  incon¬ 
venience  apathetically,  even  when  Karl  cannoned  violently 
into  a  table  -  through  no  fault  of  his  own,  certainly  -  and 
almost  knocked  it  over.  He  apologized,  but  obviously  without 
being  understood ;  nor  could  he  for  his  part  make  out  any  of 
the  remarks  that  were  shouted  at  him. 

*  At  the  buffet  he  found  with  difficulty  a  few  inches  of  free 
space,  where  his  view  was  obscurecj  for  a  long  time  by  the 
elbows  of  the  men  standing  on  either  side  of  him.  It  seemed 
a  universal  custom  here  to  plant  your  elbow  on  the  counter 


ill 


and  rest  your  head  on  your  hand.  Karl  could  not  help  remem¬ 
bering  how  his  Latin  teacher  Doctor  Krumpal  had  hated  that 
posture,  and  how  he  would  steal  up  silently  and  unexpectedly 
and  knock  your  elbow  off  the  desk  with  a  playful  rap  of  a 
ruler  which  suddenly  appeared  from  nowhere. 

Karl  was  squeezed  close  against  the  counter,  for  scarcely 
had  he  reached  it  when  a  table  was  set  up  behind  him,  and 
a  wide  hat  kept  brushing  against  his  back  whenever  the 
customer  sitting  there  leaned  backwards  a  little  in  talking. 
Also  there  seemed  to  be  little  hope  of  his  getting  anything 
out  of  the  waiters,  even  after  his  two  unmannerly  neighbours 
had  gone  away  satisfied.  Once  or  twice  Karl  snatched  at  a 
waiter  s  apron  across  the  counter,  but  the  waiter  always  tore 
himself  away  with  a  grimace.  Not  one  of  them  would  stop; 
they  did  nothing  but  rush  to  and  fro.  If  there  had  even  been 
anything  suitable  to  eat  near  at  hand  Karl  would  have 
grabbed  it,  inquired  what  the  price  was,  laid  down  the 
money  and  taken  himself  off  with  relief.  But  in  front  of  him 
there  were  only  dishes  of  fish  which  looked  like  herring, 
with  dark  scales  gleaming  golden  at  the  edges.  They  might 
be  very  dear  and  would  probably  sate  nobody's  hunger. 
There  were  also  small  casks  of  rum  within  reach,  but  he  did 
not  want  to  bring  his  friends  rum ;  as  it  was,  whenever  they 
had  the  chance  they  seemed  to  drink  only  concentrated 
alcohol,  and  he  had  no  wish  to  encourage  them  in  that. 

So  nothing  remained  for  Karl  but  to  find  another  point  of 
vantage  and  start  all  over  again.  But  by  now  the  hour  had 
considerably  advanced.  The  clock  at  the  other  end  of  the 
room,  whose  hands  could  still  just  be  discerned  through  the 
smoke  if  one  looked  very  intently,  showed  that  it  was  after 
nine.  Yet  the  rest  of  the  counter  was  even  more  crowded 
than  the  first  place  he  had  found,  which  was  in  a  retired 
corner.  Also  the  room  was  filling  up  more  and  more,  as  the 
evening  went  on.  New  customers  kept  pushing  through  the 
main  door  with  loud  halloos.  At  several  places  customers  had 
autocratically  cleared  the  counter  and  seated  themselves 


112 


upon  it  and  were  drinking  to  one  another;  that  was  the  best 
position  of  all,  you  could  overlook  the  whole  room. 

Karl  still  pressed  forward,  but  any  real  hope  of  achieving 
anything  had  vanished.  He  blamed  himself  for  having  volun¬ 
teered  to  run  this  errand  without  knowing  anything  of  the 
local  conditions.  His  friends  would  swear  at  him,  with  perfect 
right,  and  might  perhaps  even  think  that  he  had  brought 
nothing  back  simply  in  order  to  save  his  money.  He  had  now 
reached  a  part  of  the  room  where  hot  meat-dishes  and  fine 
yellow  potatoes  were  being  devoured  at  all  the  tables;  it  was 
incomprehensible  to  him  how  the  customers  had  got  hold  of 
them. 

Then  a  few  steps  in  front  of  him  he  saw  an  elderly  woman 
who  clearly  belonged  to  the  hotel  staff  and  was  talking  and 
laughing  with  a  customer.  As  she  talked  she  kept  poking  at 
her  hair  with  a  hair-pin.  Karl  at  once  decided  to  confide  his 
wants  to  this  woman,  mainly  because  as  the  only  woman  in 
the  room  she  stood  out  as  an  exception  in  the  general  hubbub, 
and  also  for  the  simple  reason  that  she  was  the  only  hotel 
employee  he  could  get  hold  of,  that  is  to  say,  if  she  did  not 
rush  away  on  her  own  business  at  the  first  word  he  addressed 
to  her.  But  quite  the  opposite  happened.  Karl  had  not  even 
spoken  to  her,  he  had  only  dodged  round  her  for  a  little 
while,  when,  as  often  happens  in  the  middle  of  a  conversa¬ 
tion,  sh.e  looked  aside  and  caught  sight  of  him  and,  interrupt¬ 
ing  what  she  was  saying,  asked  him  kindly  and  in  English 
as  clear  as  the  grammar-book  if  he  wanted  anything. 

‘Yes,  indeed/  said  Karl,  T  can't  get  a  single  thing  anywhere 
in  the  place/ 

‘Then  come  with  me,  my  boy/  she  said,  and  she  said 
good-bye  to  her  acquaintance,  who  raised  his  hat,  which  in 
this  room  seemed  an  incredible  mark  of  politeness;  then 
taking  Karl  by  the  hand  she  went  up  to  the  counter,  pushed 
a  customer  aside,  lifted  a  flap-door,  went  along  a  passage 
behind  the  counter,  where  they  had\o  side-step  the  tirelessly 
rushing  waiters,  and  opened  a  double  door  concealed  in  the 


113 


wall,  which  led  straight  into  a  large,  cool  store-room.  Toil 
have  to  know  the  workings  of  these  places/  Karl  said  to 
himself. 

‘Well  now,  what  do  you  want?’  she  asked,  bending  down 
to  him  kindly.  She  was  very  fat,  so  that  her  body  quivered, 
but  by  comparison  her  face  was  almost  delicately  modelled. 
Karl  felt  almost  tempted,  gazing  at  the  great  variety  of  eat¬ 
ables  neatly  set  out  on  shelves  and  tables,  to  invent  a  more 
elegant  supper  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  and  order  that 
instead,  especially  as  he  might  get  it  more  cheaply  from  this 
influential  lady;  but  in  the  end  he  mentioned  nothing  but 
bacon,  bread  and  beer  after  all,  as  he  could  not  think  of 
anything  more  suitable. 

‘Nothing  more?’  asked  the  woman. 

‘No,  thanks/  said  Karl,  ‘but  enough  for  three  people/ 

When  the  woman  inquired  who  the  two  others  were,  Karl 
told  her  in  a  few  brief  words  about  his  companions;  he  felt 
glad  to  be  asked  some  questions. 

‘But  that’s  prison  fare/  said  the  woman,  obviously  expect¬ 
ing  Karl  to  order  something  else.  But  Karl  was  now  afraid 
that  she  might  bestow  the  food  on  him  as  a  gift  and  refuse  to 
accept  any  money  and  so  he  kept  silent.  ‘That  won’t  take 
long  to  get  ready/  said  the  woman,  and  she  walked  over  to 
a  table  with  an  agility  wonderful  in  one  so  fat,  cut  with  a 
long,  thin,  saw-edged  knife  a  great  piece  of  bacon  richly 
streaked  with  lean,  took  a  loaf  from  a  shelf,  lifted  three 
bottles  of  beer  from  the  floor,  and  put  them  all  in  a  light 
straw  basket,  which  she  handed  to  Karl.  As  she  was  doing 
this  she  explained  to  him  that  she  had  brought  him  here 
because  the  food  in  the  buffet,  though  it  was  quickly  re¬ 
plenished,  always  lost  its  freshness  in  the  smoke  and  all  the 
steam.  Still,  for  the  people  out  there  anything  was  good 
enough.  This  struck  Karl  quite  dumb,  for  he  could  not  see 
how  he  had  earned  such  special  treatment.  He  thought  of  his 
companions  who,  in  spite  of  all  their  American  experience, 
would  probably  never  have  reached  this  store-room,  but 

114 


would  have  had  to  be  content  with  the  stale  food  in  the 
buffet.  No  sound  from  the  saloon  could  be  heard  here;  the 
walls  must  be  very  thick  to  keep  this  vaulted  chamber  so 
cool.  Karl  had  already  been  holding  the  straw  basket  in  his 
hand  for  some  time,  yet  he  thought  neither  of  paying  nor  of 
going  away.  Not  until  the  woman  made  to  put  in  the  basket, 
as  an  extra,  a  bottle  similar  to  those  standing  on  the  table 
outside,  did  he  make  a  move,  refusing  it  with  a  shiver. 

‘Have  you  much  farther  to  go?’  asked  the  woman. 

To  Butterford/  replied  Karl. 

That’s  a  long  way  still,’  said  the  woman.  • 

‘Another  day’s  journey,’  said  Karl. 

‘Isn’t  it  more  than  that?’  asked  the  woman. 

‘Oh  no/  said  Karl. 

The  woman  rearranged  some  things  on  the  tables;  a  waiter 
came  in,  looked  round  interrogatively,  and  was  directed  by 
her  to  a  huge  platter,  on  which  lay  a  large  heap  of  sardines 
lightly  strewn  with  parsley,  which  he  then  bore  in  his  raised 
hands  into  the  saloon. 

‘Why  should  you  spend  the  night  in  the  open  air?’  asked 
the  woman.  ‘We  have  room  enough  here.  Come  and  sleep 
here  with  us  in  the  hotel.’ 

The  thought  was  very  tempting  to  Karl,  particularly  as 
he  had  slept  so  badly  the  previous  night. 

‘I  have  my  luggage  out  there,’  he  said  hesitatingly  and 
not  without  a  certain  pride. 

Then  just  bring  it  here/  said  the  woman,  ‘that’s  no 
hindrance.’ 

‘But  what  about  my  friends?’  said  Karl,  realizing  at  once 
that  they  were  certainly  a  hindrance. 

They  can  spend  the  night  here  too,  of  course/  said  the 
woman.  ‘Do  come  !  Don’t  be  so  difficult.’ 

‘My  friends  are  first-rate  comrades/  said  Karl,  ‘but  they’re 
not  exactly  clean.’ 

‘Haven’t  you  seen  the  dirt  in  the  saloon  ?’  asked  the  woman 
with  a  grimace.  ‘We  can  well  take  in  the  hardest  cases.  All 


115 


right,  I’ll  have  three  beds  got  ready  at  once.  Only  in  an  attic. 
I’m  afraid,  for  the  hotel  is  full;  I’ve  had  to  move  into  an 
attic  myself,  but  at  any  rate  it’s  better  than  sleeping  out.’ 

‘I  can’t  bring  my  friends  here/  said  Karl.  He  pictured  to 
himself  the  row  the  two  of  them  would  make  in  the  passages 
of  this  fine  hotel;  Robinson  would  dirty  everything  and 
Delamarche  would  not  fail  to  molest  the  woman  herself. 

‘I  don’t  see  why  that  should  be  impossible/  said  she,  ‘but 
if  you  insist  on  it,  then  leave  your  friends  behind  and  come 
without  them/ 

That  wouldn’t  do/  said  Karl.  They’re  my  friends  and  I 
must  stick  to  them/ 

‘You’re  very  obstinate/  said  the  woman,  turning  her  eyes 
away,  ‘when  people  mean  well  by  you  and  try  to  do  you  a 
good  turn,  you  do  your  best  to  hinder  them.’  Karl  realized 
all  this,  but  he  saw  no  way  out,  so  he  merely  said :  ‘My  best 
thanks  to  you  for  your  kindness/  Then  he  remembered  that 
he  had  not  paid  her  yet,  and  he  asked  what  he  owed. 

‘You  can  pay  me  when  you  bring  the  basket  back/  said  the 
woman,  ‘I  must  have  it  tomorrow  morning  at  the  latest/ 

Thank  you/  said  Karl.  She  opened  a  door  which  led 
straight  into  the  open  air  and  said,  as  he  stepped  out  with  a 
bow :  ‘Good  night.  But  you’re  not  doing  the  right  thing.’  He 
was  already  a  few  yards  away  when  she  cried  after  him  again: 
Till  tomorrow  morning !’ 

Hardly  was  he  outside  when  he  heard  again  the  un¬ 
diminished  roar  of  the  saloon,  with  which  was  now  mingled 
the  blare  of  wind  instruments.  He  was  glad  that  he  had  not 
to  go  out  through  the  saloon.  All  five  floors  of  the  hotel  were 
now  illuminated  and  made  the  road  in  front  of  it  bright  from 
one  side  to  the  other.  Automobiles  were  still  careering  along 
the  road,  although  more  intermittently,  looming  into  sight 
more  rapidly  than  by  day,  feeling  for  the  road  before  them 
with  the  white  beams  of  their  headlights,  which  paled  as 
they  crossed  the  lighted  zone  of  the  hotel  only  to  blaze  out 
again  as  they  rushed  into  the  farther  darkness. 

116 


Karl  found  his  friends  sleeping  soundly;  but  then  he  had 
been  far  too  long  away.  He  was  just  preparing  to  set  out 
temptingly  on  paper  the  food  he  had  brought,  making  all 
ready  before  waking  his  companions,  when  to  his  horror  he 
saw  his  box,  which  he  had  left  securely  locked  and  whose 
key  he  had  in  his  pocket,  standing  wide  open  and  half  its 
contents  scattered  about  on  the  grass. 

'Get  up  !  ’  he  cried.  'There  have  been  thieves  here,  and  you 
lying  sleeping  !’ 

'Why,  is  anything  missing?’  asked  Delamarche.  Robinson 
was  not  quite  awake,  yet  his  hand  was  already  reaching 
towards  the  beer. 

'I  don’t  know/  cried  Karl,  'but  the  box  is  open.  It  was 
very  careless  of  you  to  go  to  sleep  and  leave  the  box  here  at 
anybody’s  mercy/. 

Delamarche  and  Robinson  laughed,  and  Delamarche  said: 
Then  you’d  better  not  stay  away  so  long  next  time.  It’s  only 
a  step  or  two  to  the  hotel  and  yet  you  take  three  hours  to  go 
there  and  come  back  again.  We  were  hungry,  we  thought 
that  you  might  have  something  to  eat  in  your  box,  so  we 
just  tickled  the  lock  until  it  opened.  But  there  was  nothing 
in  it  after  all  and  your  stuff  can  easily  go  back  again/ 

‘I  see/  said  Karl,  staring  at  the  quickly  emptying  basket 
and  listening  to  the  curious  noise  which  Robinson  made  in 
drinking,  for  the  beer  seemed  first  to  plunge  right  down  into 
his  throat  and  gurgle  up  again  with  a  sort  of  whistle  before 
finally  pouring  its  flood  into  the  deep. 

‘Have  you  had  enough  now?’  he  asked,. when  the  two  of 
them  paused  to  take  breath  for  a  moment. 

‘Why,  didn’t  you  have  your  supper  in  the  hotel?'  asked 
Delamarche,  who  thought  that  Karl  was  putting  in  a  claim 
for  his  share. 

'If  you  want  any  more,  then  hurry  up/  said  Karl,  going 
over  to  his  box. 

'He  seems  to  be  in  a  huff/  said  Delamarche  to  Robinson. 

'I’m  not  in  a  huff/  said  Karl,  'but  do  you  think  it’s  right  to 


break  open  my  box  and  fling  out  my  things  while  I’m  away? 
I  know  that  one  must  put  up  with  a  lot  from  friends  and  I’ve 
been  prepared  to  do  that;  but  this  is  too  much.  I’m  going  to 
spend  the  night  in  the  hotel,  and  I’m  not  going  with  you  to 
Butterford.  Finish  youi  supper  quickly;  I’ve  got  to  take  back 
the  basket/ 

‘Just  listen  to  him,  Robinson/  said  Delamarche.  ‘That’s  a 
fine  way  of  talking.  He’s  a  German  all  right.  You  did  warn 
me  against  him  at  the  beginning,  but  I’m  a  kind-hearted  fool 
and  so  I  let  him  come  with  us  all  the  same.  We’ve  given  him 
our  confidence,  we’ve  dragged  him  with  us  all  day  and  lost 
half  a  day  at  least  on  his  account,  and  now  -  just  because  he’s 
chummed  up  with  somebody  in  the  hotel  -  he  gives  us  the 
go-by,  simply  gives  us  the  go-by.  But  because  he’s  a  lying 
German  he  doesn’t  do  it  frankly  but  makes  his  box  a  pretext, 
and  being  an  ill-mannered  German  he  can’t  leave  us  without 
insulting  our  honour  and  calling  us  thieves,  just  because  we 
had  a  little  fun  with  his  box.’ 

Karl,  who  was  packing  his  things,  said  without  turning 
round :  The  more  you  say,  the  easier  you  make  it  for  me  to 
leave  you.  I  know  quite  well  what  friendship  is.  I  have  had 
friends  in  Europe  too  and  none  of  them  can  accuse  me  of 
ever  behaving  falsely  or  meanly  to  him.  I’m  not  in  touch 
with  them  now,  naturally,  but  if  I  ever  go  back  to  Europe 
again  they’ll  all  be  glad  to  see  me,  and  they’ll  welcome  me 
at  once  as  a  friend.  As  for  you,  Delamarche  and  Robinson, 
I’m  supposed  to  have  betrayed  you,  am  I,  after  you  were  so 
kind  -  and  I’ll  never  forget  that  -  as  to  let  me  join  up  with 
you  and  have  a  chance  of  an  apprentice’s  job  in  Butterford? 
But  that  isn’t  how  it  is  at  all.  I  think  none  the  less  of  you 
because  you  own  nothing,  but  you  grudge  me  my  few  pos¬ 
sessions  and  try  to  humiliate  me  because  of  them,  and  that 
I  cannot  endure.  And  you  break  open  my  box  and  offer  no 
word  of  excuse,  but  abuse  me  instead  and  my  people  as  well 
-  and  that  simply  makes  it  impossible  for  me  to  stay  with 
you.  All  the  same,  this  doesn’t  really  apply  to  you,  Robinson. 

118 


I  have  nothing  against  you  except  that  you  are  far  too 
dependent  on  Delamarche.’ 

‘So  now  we  see/  said  Delamarche,  stepping  over  to  Karl 
and  giving  him  a  slight  push,  as  if  to  insist  on  his  attention, 
‘so  now  we  see  you  at  last  in  your  true  colours.  All  day  you've 
trotted  behind  me,  hanging  on  to  my  coat-tails  and  doing 
whatever  I  did  and  keeping  as  quiet  as  a  mouse.  But  now 
that  somebody  in  the  hotel's  backing  you  up,  you  begin  to 
throw  your  weight  about.  You’re  a  little  twister,  and  I’m 
not  so  sure  that  we’re  going  to  put  up  with  that  kind  of 
thing.  I'm  not  so  sure  that  we  aren’t  going  to  make  you  pay 
for  what  you’ve  learned  by  watching  us  today.  We  envy 
him,  Robinson  -  envy  him,  says  he  -  because  of  his  posses¬ 
sions.  One  day’s  work  in  Butterford  -  not  to  mention  Cali¬ 
fornia  -  and  we’ll  have  ten  times  as  much  as  anything  you've 
shown  us  yet,  or  anything  you’ve  got  hidden  in  the  lining  of 
that  coat.  So  keep  your  tongue  quiet !’ 

Karl  had  risen  from  his  box  and  saw  Robinson  also 
advancing  upon  him,  still  sleepy  but  a  little  enlivened  by  the 
beer.  ‘If  I  stay  here  longer/  he  said,  ‘I’ll  maybe  get  some  more 
surprises.  It  seems  to  me  you  want  to  beat  me  up.’ 

‘Nobody’s  patience  lasts  for  ever/  said  Robinson. 

‘You’d  better  keep  out  of  it,  Robinson/  said  Karl,  without 
taking  his  eyes  from  Delamarche,  ‘in  your  heart  you  know 
that  I’m  right,  but  you’ve  got  to  make  a  show  of  agreeing 
with  Delamarche !  ’ 

‘Are  you  maybe  thinking  of  bribing  him?’  asked 
Delamarche. 

‘Never  occurred  to  me/  said  Karl.  ‘I’m  glad  to  be  going 
and  I  want  to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  either  of  you. 
There’s  only  one  thing  more  I  want  to  say:  you  have  re¬ 
proached  me  for  having  money  and  concealing  it  from  you. 
Granted  that’s  true,  wasn’t  it  the  right  thing  to  do  with 
people  that  I  had  known  only  for  a  few  hours,  and  isn’t  the 
way  you’re  carrying  on  now  a  proof  of  how  right  I  was?’ 

‘Keep  quiet/  said  Delamarche  to  Robinson,  though  Robin- 

119 


son  had  not  moved.  Then  he  said  to  Karl :  'Seeing  that  you're 
making  such  a  parade  of  honesty,  why  not  stretch  your 
honesty  a  little  farther,  now  that  we’re  having  a  friendly 
heart-to-heart,  and  tell  us  why  you  really  want  to  go  to  the 
hotel  ?  ’  Karl  had  to  take  a  step  back  over  the  box,  Delamarche 
had  pushed  up  so  close  to  him.  But  Delamarche  was  not  to  be 
deflected,  he  kicked  the  box  aside,  took  another  step  forward, 
planting  his  foot  on  a  white  dickey  that  had  been  left  lying 
on  the  grass,  and  repeated  his  question. 

As  if  in  answer  a  man  with  a  powerful  flash-lamp  climbed 
up  from  the  road  towards  the  group.  It  was  one  of  the  waiters 
from  the  hotel.  As  soon  as  he  caught  sight  of  Karl  he  said: 
'I’ve  been  looking  for  you  for  nearly  half  an  hour.  I’ve  been 
hunting  through  all  the  bushes  on  both  sides  of  the  road. 
The  Manageress  sent  me  to  tell  you  that  she  needs  that  straw 
basket  she  lent  you.’ 

‘Here  it  is,’  said  Karl  in  a  voice  trembling  with  agitation. 
Delamarche  and  Robinson  had  drawn  aside  in  pretended 
humility,  as  they  always  did  when  decent-looking  strangers 
appeared.  The  waiter  picked  up  the  basket  and  said:  ‘The 
Manageress  also  told  me  to  ask  you  whether  you  haven’t 
changed  your  mind  and  would  like  to  sleep  in  the  hotel  after 
all.  The  other  two  gentlemen  would  be  welcome  too,  if  you 
care  to  bring  them  with  you.  The  beds  are  all  ready  for  you. 
It’s  warm  enough  tonight,  but  it’s  far  from  safe  to  sleep  in 
this  place;  you  often  come  across  snakes.’ 

'Since  the  Manageress  is  so  kind.  I’ll  accept  her  invitation 
after  all,’  said  Karl,  and  waited  for  his  companions  to  say 
something.  But  Robinson  stood  there  quite  dumb  and  Dela¬ 
marche  was  looking  up  at  the  stars  with  his  hands  in  his 
trousers  pockets.  Both  were  obviously  expecting  Karl  to  take 
them  with  him  without  further  ado. 

‘In  that  case,’  said  the  waiter,  ‘I  have  orders  to  take  you  to 
the  hotel  and  carry  your  luggage  there.’ 

'Then  please  just  wait  a  moment,’  said  Karl,  bending  down 
to  put  in  his  box  the  few  things  which  were  still  lying  about. 


120 


Suddenly  he  straightened  himself.  The  photograph,  which 
had  been  lying  on  the  very  top,  was  missing  and  nowhere  to 
be  found.  Everything  else  was  there,  except  the  photograph. 
'I  can't  find  the  photograph/  he  said  to  Delamarche 
imploringly. 

'What  photograph?'  asked  Delamarche. 

The  photograph  of  my  parents/  said  Karl. 

'We  haven't  seen  any  photograph  in  the  box,  Mr  Ross- 
mann/  said  Rohinson. 

‘But  that's  quite  impossible/  said  Karl,  and  his  beseeching 
glances  brought  the  waiter  nearer.  ‘It  was,  lying  on  the  top 
and  now  it’s  gone.  I  do  wish  you  hadn’t  played  about  with 
my  box.' 

‘We’re  not  making  any  mistake/  said  Delamarche,  ‘there 
was  no  photograph  in  the  box.' 

‘It  was  more  important  to  me  than  all  the  other  things  in 
the  box/  said  Karl  to  the  waiter,  who  was  walking  about 
looking  in  the  grass.  ‘For  it's  irreplaceable;  I  can't  get  another 
one/  And  when  the  waiter  gave  up  the  hopeless  search,  Karl 
added:  ‘It  was  the  only  photograph  of  my  parents  that  I 
possessed.’ 

Then  the  waiter  said  aloud,  without  any  attempt  to  miti¬ 
gate  the  words:  ‘Maybe  we  could  run  through  these 
gentlemen’s  pockets.' 

Tes/  said  Karl  at  once,  ‘I  must  find  the  photograph.  But 
before  searching  their  pockets,  let  me  say  this,  that  whoever 
gives  me  the  photograph  of  his  own  accord  can  have  my  box 
and  everything  in  it.’  After  a  moment  of  general  silence  Karl 
said  to  the  waiter :  ‘It  seems  my  friends  prefer  to  have  their 
pockets  searched.  But  even  now  I  promise  the  box  and  every¬ 
thing  in  it  to  anyone  in  whose  pocket  the  photograph  is 
found.  More  I  can't  do.' 

The  waiter  immediately  set  about  searching  Delamarche, 
who  seemed  to  him  more  difficult  to  handle  than  Robinson, 
whom  he  left  to  Karl.  He  impressed  upon  Karl  that  they 
must  both  be  searched  simultaneously,  otherwise  one  of  them 


121 


might  get  rid  of  the  photograph  unobserved.  As  soon  as  he 
put  his  hand  into  Robinson’s  pocket,  Karl  found  a  scarf 
belonging  to  himself,  but  he  refrained  from  taking  it  and 
called  to  the  waiter:  ‘Whatever  you  find  on  Delamarche,  let 
him  keep  it.  I  want  nothing  but  the  photograph,  only  the 
photograph/ 

In  searching  the  breast  pocket  of  Robinson’s  coat  Karl’s 
hand  came  in  contact  with  the  man’s  hot,  flabby  chest  and 
he  became  aware  that  he  might  be  doing  his  companions  a 
great  injustice.  That  made  him  hurry  as  fast  as  he  could.  But 
all  was  in  vain;  no  photograph  was  to  be  found  either  on 
Robinson  or  on  Delamarche. 

‘It’s  no  good,’  said  the  waiter. 

They’ve  probably  torn  up  the  photograph  and  flung  the 
pieces  away,’  said  Karl.  T  thought  they  were  friends,  but  in 
their  hearts  they  only  wished  me  ill.  Not  so  much  Robinson; 
it  would  never  have  occurred  to  him  that  I  set  such  store  on 
the  photograph;  that’s  more  like  Delamarche.’  Karl  could 
now  see  only  the  waiter,  whose  flash-lamp  lit  up  a  tiny  circle, 
while  everything  else,  including  Delamarche  and  Robinson, 
lay  in  deep  darkness. 

There  was  naturally  no  question  now  of  the  two  men 
going  to  the  hotel  with  Karl.  The  waiter  swung  the  box  on 
to  his  shoulder,  Karl  picked  up  the  straw  basket,  and  they 
set  off.  Karl  had  already  reached  the  road  when,  starting  out 
of  his  thoughts,  he  stopped  and  shouted  up  into  the  dark¬ 
ness  :  ‘Listen  to  me.  If  either  of  you  has  the  photograph  and 
will  bring  it  to  me  at  the  hotel,  he  can  still  have  the  box, 
and  I  swear  that  I  won’t  make  any  charge  against  him.’  No 
actual  answer  came,  only  a  stifled  word  could  be  heard,  the 
beginning  of  a  shout  from  Robinson,  whose  mouth  was 
obviously  stopped  at  once  by  Delamarche.  Karl  waited  for  a 
long  time,  in  case  the  men  above  him  might  change  their 
minds.  He  shouted  twice,  at  intervals:  ‘I’m  still  here!’  But 
no  sound  came  in  reply,  except  that  a  stone  rolled  down  the 
slope,  perhaps  a  chance  stone,  perhaps  a  badly  aimed  throw. 


5.  The  Hotel  Occidental 


On  reaching  the  hotel  Karl  was  at  once  conducted  to  a  sort 
of  office,  in  which  the  Manageress,  with  a  notebook  in  her 
hand,  was  dictating  a  letter  to  a  young  stenographer  sitting 
at  a  typewriter. 'The  consummately  precise  dictation,  the 
controlled  and  buoyant  tapping  of  the  keys  raced  on  to  the 
ticking,  noticeable  only  now  and  then,  of  a  clock  standing 
against  the  wall,  whose  hands  pointed  to  almost  half-past 
eleven.  There  ! ’  said  the  Manageress,  shutting  the  notebook; 
the  stenographer  jumped  up  and  put  the  lid  on  the  typewriter 
without  taking  her  eyes  from  Karl  during  these  mechanical 
actions.  She  looked  like  a  schoolgirl  still,  her  overall  was 
neatly  ironed,  even  pleated  at  the  shoulders;  her  hair  was 
piled  up  high;  and  it  was  a  little  surprising,  after  noting 
these  details,  to  see  the  gravity  of  her  face.  After  making  a 
bow,  first  to  the  Manageress,  then  to  Karl,  she  left  the  room 
and  Karl  involuntarily  flung  a  questioning  glance  at  the 
Manageress. 

‘It's  splendid  that  you’ve  come  after  all/  said  the 
Manageress.  ‘And  what  about  your  friends?’ 

‘I  haven’t  brought  them  with  me,’  said  Karl. 

They’ll  be  moving  on  very  early  in  the  morning,  I  sup¬ 
pose,’  said  the  Manageress,  as  if  to  explain  the  matter  to 
herself. 

‘But  mustn’t  she  think  in  that  case  that  I’ll  have  to  start 
early  too?’  Karl  asked  himself,  and  so  he  said  to  put  an  end 
to  all  misunderstanding :  ‘We  parted  on  bad  terms.’ 

The  Manageress  seemed  to  constrite  this  as  excellent  news. 
'So  then  you’re  free?’  she  said. 


123 


Tes,  I’m  free,’  said  Karl,  and  nothing  seemed  more  worth¬ 
less  than  his  freedom. 

’Listen,  wouldn’t  you  like  to  take  a  job  here  in  the  hotel?’ 
asked  the  Manageress. 

’Very  much,’  said  Karl,  ’but  I  have  terribly  little  ex¬ 
perience.  For  instance,  I  can’t  even  use  a  typewriter/ 

‘That’s  not  very  important/  said  the  Manageress.  ‘You’d 
be  given  only  a  small  job  to  begin  with,  and  it  would  be  your 
business  to  work  your  way  up  by  diligence  and  attentiveness. 
But  in  any  case  I  think  it  would  be  better  and  wiser  for  you 
to  settle  down  somewhere,  instead  of  wandering  about  like 
this.  I  don’t  think  you’re  made  for  that  kind  of  thing.’ 

‘My  uncle  would  subscribe  to  that  too/  Karl  told  himself, 
nodding  in  agreement.  At  the  same  time  he  reminded  himself 
that  though  the  Manageress  had  shown  such  concern  for 
him,  he  had  not  yet  introduced  himself.  ‘Please  forgive  me/ 
he  said,  ‘for  not  having  introduced  myself  before.  My  name 
is  Karl  Rossmann/ 

‘You’re  a  German,  aren’t  you?' 

‘Yes/  said  Karl,  ‘I  haven’t  been  long  in  America/ 

‘Where  do  you  come  from  ?  ’ 

‘From  Prague,  in  Bohemia,’  said  Karl. 

‘Just  think  of  that !'  cried  the  Manageress  in  English  with 
a  strong  German  inflection,  almost  flinging  her  hands  in  the 
air.  ‘Then  we’re  compatriots,  for  my  name  is  Grete  Mitzelbach 
and  I  come  from  Vienna.  And  I  know  Prague  quite  well;  I 
worked  for  half  a  year  in  the  “Golden  Goose’’  in  Wenceslaus 
Square.  Only  think  of  that !  ’ 

‘When  was  that?’  asked  Karl. 

‘Many,  many  years  ago  now.' 

‘The  old  “Golden  Goose’’/  said  Karl,  ‘was  pulled  down 
two  years  ago.’ 

‘Well,  well,'  said  the  Manageress,  quite  absorbed  in  her 
thoughts  of  past  days. 

But  all  at  once,  becoming  animated  again,  she  seized  both 
Karl’s  hands  and  cried:  ‘Now  that  you  turn  out  to  be  a 


124 


countryman  of  mine,  you  mustn’t  go  away  on  any  account. 
You  mustn’t  offend  me  by  doing  that.  How  would  you  like, 
for  instance,  to  be  a  lift-boy  ?  Just  say  the  word  and  it  s 
done.  If  you’ve  seen  something  of  this  country,  you  11  realize 
that  it  isn’t  very  easy  to  get  such  posts,  for  they’re  the  best 
start  in  life  that  you  can  think  of.  You  come  in  contact  with 
all  the  hotel  guests,  people  are  always  seeing  you  and  giving 
you  little  errands  to  do;  in  short,  every  day  you  have  the 
chance  to  better  yourself.  I’ll  fix  everything  up  for  you;  leave 
it  to  me.’ 

'I  should  like  quite  well  to  be  a  lift-boy,’*  said  Karl  after  a 
slight  pause.  It  would  be  very  foolish  to  have  any  scruples 
about  accepting  a  post  as  lift-boy  because  of  his  High  School 
education.  Here  in  America  he  had  much  more  cause  to  be 
ashamed  of  his  High  School.  Besides,  Karl  had  always  admired 
lift-boys;  he  thought  them  very  ornamental. 

‘Isn’t  a  knowledge  of  languages  required?’  he  asked  next. 

‘You  speak  German  and  perfectly  good  English;  that’s 
quite  enough.’ 

‘I’ve  learned  English  only  in  the  last  two  and  a  half  months 
in  America,’  said.  Karl,  for  he  thought  he  had  better  not 
conceal  his  one  merit.  ‘That’s  a  sufficient  recommendation  in 
itself,’  said  the  Manageress.  ‘When  I  think  of  the  difficulties 
I  had  with  my  English !  Of  course,  that’s  thirty  years  ago 
now.  I  was  talking  about  it  only  yesterday.  For  yesterday 
was  my  fiftieth  birthday.’  And  she  smilingly  tried  to  read  in 
Karl’s  face  the  impression  which  such  a  dignified  age  made 
upon  him. 

‘Then  I  wish  you  much  happiness,’  said  Karl. 

‘Well,  it  always  comes  in  useful,’  said  she,  shaking  Karl’s 
hand  and  looking  a  little  melancholy  over  the  old  German 
phrase  which  had  come  quite  naturally  to  the  tip  of  her 
tongue. 

‘But  I  am  keeping  you  here,'  she  cried  all  at  once.  ‘And  you 
must  be  tired,  and  we  can  talk  over%everything  much  better 
tomorrow.  My  pleasure  in  meeting  a  countryman  has  made 

125 


me  forget  everything  else.  Come,  I'll  show  you  your  room/ 

‘I  have  one  more  favour  to  beg/  said  Karl,  glancing  at  the 
telephone  which  stood  on  the  table.  ‘It’s  possible  that  to¬ 
morrow  morning  these  one-time  friends  of  mine  may  bring 
me  a  photograph  which  I  urgently  need.  Would  you  be  so 
kind  as  to  telephone  to  the  porter  to  send  the  men  up  to  me, 
or  else  call  me  down?' 

‘Certainly,’  said  the  Manageress,  ‘but  wouldn’t  it  do  if 
they  gave  him  the  photograph?  What  photograph  is  it,  if  I 
may  ask?’ 

‘It’s  a  photograph  of  my  parents,’  said  Karl.  ‘No,  I  must 
speak  to  the  men  myself.’  The  Manageress  said  nothing 
further  and  telephoned  the  order  to  the  porter’s  office,  giving 
536  as  the  number  of  Karl’s  room. 

They  went  then  through  a  door  facing  the  entrance  door 
and  along  a  short  passage,  where  a  small  lift-boy  was  leaning 
against  the  railing  of  a  lift,  fast  asleep.  ‘We  can  work  it  our¬ 
selves,’  said  the  Manageress  softly,  ushering  Karl  into  the 
lift.  ‘A  working  day  of  from  ten  to  twelve  hours  is  really 
rather  much  for  a  boy  like  that,’  she  added,  while  they 
ascended.  ‘But  America’s  a  strange  country.  Take  this  boy, 
for  instance;  he  came  here  only  half  a  year  ago  with  his 
parents;  he’s  an  Italian.  At  the  moment  it  looks  as  if  he 
simply  wouldn’t  be  able  to  stand  the  work,  his  face  has  fallen 
away  to  nothing  and  he  goes  to  sleep  on  the  job,  although 
he’s  naturally  a  very  willing  lad  -  but  let  him  only  go  on 
working  here  or  anywhere  else  in  America  for  another  six 
months  and  he’ll  be  able  to  take  it  all  in  his  stride,  and  in 
another  five  years  he’ll  be  a  strong  man.  I  could  spend  hours 
telling  you  about  such  cases.  You’re  not  one  of  them,  for 
you’re  a  strong  lad  already;  you’re  seventeen,  aren’t  you?' 

‘I’ll  be  sixteen  next  month,’  replied  Karl. 

‘Not  even  sixteen !’  said  the  Manageress.  ‘Then  you  don’t 
need  to  worry !  ’ 

At  the  top  of  the  building  she  led  Karl  to  a  room  which, 
being  a  garret,  had  a  sloping  wall,  but  was  lit  by  two  electric 

126 


lamps  and  looked  most  inviting.  ‘Don’t  be  surprised  at  the 
furnishings/  said  the  Manageress,  ‘for  this  isn’t  a  hotel  room, 
but  one  of  my  rooms;  I  have  three  of  them,  so  that  you  won’t 
disturb  me  in  the  least.  I'll  lock  the  connecting  doors  and 
you’ll  be  quite  private.  Tomorrow,  as  a  new  hotel  employee, 
you  will  of  course  be  given  your  own  room.  If  your  friends 
had  come  with  you,  I  would  have  put  you  all  in  the  large 
attic  where  the  hotel  servants  sleep;  but  as  you  are  alone  I 
think  you  would  be  better  here,  though  you’ll  have  nothing 
but  a  sofa  to  lie  on.  And  now  sleep  well  and  gather  strength 
for  your  work.  Tomorrow  it  won’t  be  so  very  hard.’ 

‘Thank  you  very  much  indeed  for  your  kindness.’ 

‘Wait,’  she  said,  stopping  by  the  door,  ‘I’ll  have  to  keep  you 
from  being  wakened  up  too  early.’  And  she  went  to  a  side 
door  opening  out  of  the  room,  knocked  on  it  and  cried: 
‘Therese !  ’ 

‘Yes,  madam,’  replied  the  voice  of  the  typist. 

‘When  you  waken  me  in  the  morning  go  round  by  the 
passage;  there’s  a  guest  sleeping  in  this  room.  He’s  dead 
tired.’  She  smiled  at  Karl  while  saying  this.  ‘Do  you  under¬ 
stand  ? ' 

‘Yes,  madam/ 

‘Well  then,  good  night/ 

‘Good  night/ 

‘I  have  slept/  said  the  Manageress  in  explanation,  ‘very 
badly  for  several  years.  I  have  every  right  to  be  satisfied  with 
my  present  position  and  don’t  really  need  to  worry.  But  all 
my  earlier  worries  must  be  taking  it  out  of  me  now  and 
keeping  me  from  sleeping.  If  I  fall  asleep  by  three  in  the 
morning,  I  can  count  myself  lucky.  But  as  I  have  to  be  at  my 
post  by  five,  or  half-past  five  at  the  latest,  I  have  to  be 
wakened  and  very  gently  wakened,  to  prevent  me  from  turn¬ 
ing  more  nervous  than  I  am  already.  And  so  Therese  wakens 
me.  But  now  I’ve  really  told  you  everything  there  is  to  tell 
and  I’m  not  away  yet.  Good  night.’ %And  in  spite  of  her  bulk 
she  almost  flitted  out  of  the  room. 


Karl  was  looking  forward  to  his  sleep,  for  the  day  had  taken 
a  great  deal  out  of  him.  And  more  comfortable  quarters  for 
a  long,  unbroken  sleep  he  could  not  wish  for.  The  room  was 
certainly  not  intended  for  a  bedroom,  it  was  rather  the 
Manageress’s  living-room,  or  more  exactly  reception-room, 
and  a  wash-stand  had  been  specially  put  in  it  for  his  use  that 
night;  yet  he  did  not  feel  like  an  intruder,  but  only  that  he 
was  being  well  looked  after.  His  box  was  there  all  right, 
waiting  for  him,  and  certainly  had  not  been  so  safe  for  a  long 
time.  On  a  low  chest  of  drawers,  over  which  a  large-meshed 
woollen  cover  had  been  flung,  several  framed  photographs 
were  standing;  in  making  his  round  of  the  room  Karl  stopped 
to  look  at  them.  They  were  nearly  all  old  photographs,  mostly 
of  girls  in  old-fashioned,  uncomfortable  clothes,  a  small,  high- 
crowned  hat  insecurely  perched  on  each  head  and  the  right 
hand  resting  on  the  handle  of  a  sun-shade;  girls  who  stood 
facing  the  spectator  and  yet  refused  to  meet  his  eyes.  Among 
the  photographs  of  the  men  Karl  was  particularly  struck  by 
a  young  soldier  who  had  laid  his  cap  on  a  table  and  was 
standing  erect  with  a  thatch  of  wild,  black  hair  and  a  look 
of  suppressed  but  arrogant  amusement.  Someone  had  re¬ 
touched  the  buttons  of  his  uniform  with  dots  of  gold  paint. 
All  these  photographs  probably  came  from  Europe,  and  by 
turning  them  over  it  would  be  possible  to  make  sure,  yet 
Karl  did  not  want  to  lay  a  finger  upon  them.  He  would  have 
liked  to  set  up  the  photograph  of  his  parents  in  the  room  he 
was  going  to  have,  just  like  these  photographs  here. 

He  was  just  stretching  himself  on  the  sofa  and  looking 
forward  to  his  sleep  after  washing  himself  thoroughly  from 
head  to  foot,  which  he  had  taken  care  to  do  as  quietly  as 
possible  on  account  of  the  girl  next  door,  when  he  thought  he 
heard  a  low  knock  at  a  door.  He  could  not  make  out  at  once 
which  door  it  was;  it  might  well  have  been  only  some  random 
noise.  Nor  was  it  repeated  at  once,  and  he  was  half  asleep  by 
the  time  it  came  again.  But  now  it  was  unmistakably  a 
knock  and  it  came  from  the  door  of  the  typist’s  room.  Karl 

128 


tiptoed  to  the  door  and  asked  so  softly  that,  even  if  the  girl 
in  the  next  room  were  sleeping  after  all,  it  could  not  waken 
her:  ‘Do  you  want  anything?' 

At  once  the  reply  came  in  an  equally  soft  voice:  'Won't 
you  open  the  door?  The  key  is  on  your  side.' 

‘Certainly/  said  Karl,  'only  I  must  put  on  some  clothes 
first.' 

There  was  a  slight  pause,  then  the  girl  said:  'You  don  t 
need  to  do  that.  Unlock  the  door  and  go  back  to  bed  again; 
I’ll  wait  for  a  little.' 

‘Good/  said  Karl  and  did  as  she  had  suggested,  except  that 
he  switched  on  the  electric  light  as  well.  ‘I'm  in  bed  now,'  he 
said  then,  somewhat  more  loudly.  Then  the  typist  emerged 
from  her  dark  room  fully  dressed  as  she  had  left  the  office; 
apparently  she  had  not  even  thought  of  going  to  bed. 

‘Please  excuse  me,'  she  said,  drooping  a  little  before  Karl's 
sofa,  ‘and  please  don't  tell  on  me.  And  I  won’t  disturb  you 
for  long;  I  know  you’re  dead  tired.' 

‘I'm  not  so  tired  as  all  that/  said  Karl,  ‘but  maybe  it  might 
have  been  better  if  I  had  put  on  some  clothes.'  He  had  to  lie 
quite  flat  to  keep  himself  covered  to  the  neck,  for  he  had  no 
nightshirt. 

‘I’ll  only  stay  a  minute/  she  said,  looking  about  for  a  chair. 
‘May  I  sit  beside  the  sofa?'  Karl  nodded.  She  set  her  chair  so 
close  to  the  sofa  that  Karl  had  to  squeeze  against  the  wall 
to  look  up  at  her.  She  had  a  round,  regularly  formed  face, 
except  that  the  brow  looked  unusually  high,  but  that  might 
have  been  an  effect  of  the  way  her  hair  was  done,  which  did 
not  quite  suit  her.  Her  dress  was  very  clean  and  neat.  In  her 
left  hand  she  was  crushing  a  handkerchief. 

‘Are  you  going  to  stay  here  long  ? '  she  asked. 

‘It  isn’t  quite  settled  yet/  replied  Karl,  ‘but  I  think  I’m 
going  to  stay.' 

‘That  would  be  splendid,'  she  said,  passing  the  handker¬ 
chief  over  her  face,  ‘for  I  feel  so  lonelyTiere.' 

‘I  m  surprised  at  that/  said  Karl.  ‘The  Manageress  is  very 

129 


kind  to  you,  isn’t  she?  She  doesn’t  treat  you  like  an  employee 
at  all.  I  actually  thought  you  were  a  relation  of  hers/ 

‘Oh  no/  she  said,  ‘my  name  is  Therese  Berchtold;  I  come 
from  Pomerania/ 

Karl  also  introduced  himself.  At  that,  she  looked  him  full 
in  the  face  for  the  first  time,  as  if  he  had  become  a  Little  more 
strange  to  her  by  mentioning  his  name.  They  were  both 
silent  for  a  while.  Then  she  said:  ‘You  mustn’t  think  that 
I’m  ungrateful.  If  it  weren’t  for  the  Manageress  I'd  be  in  a 
much  worse  state.  I  used  to  be  a  kitchen-maid  here  in  the 
hotel  and  in  great  danger  of  being  dismissed  too,  for  I  wasn’t 
equal  to  the  heavy  work.  They  expect  a  lot  from  you  here.  A, 
month  ago  a  kitchen-maid  simply  fainted  under  the  strain 
and  had  to  lie  up  in  hospital  for  fourteen  days.  And  I’m  not: 
very  strong,  I  was  often  ill  as  a  child,  and  so  I’ve  been  slow 
in  catching  up;  you  would  never  think,  would  you,  that  I’m 
eighteen?  But  I’m  getting  stronger  now/ 

The  work  here  must  really  be  very  tiring/  said  Karl.  ‘E 
saw  a  lift-boy  downstairs  standing  sleeping  on  his  feet/ 

‘The  lift-boys  have  the  best  of  it,  all  the  same/  she  said. 
They  make  quite  a  lot  in  tips  and  in  spite  of  that  they  don’t 
have  to  work  nearly  so  hard  as  the  girls  in  the  kitchen. 
But  for  once  in  my  life  I  really  was  lucky,  for  one  day  the 
Manageress  needed  a  girl  to  arrange  the  table-napkins  for  a 
banquet  and  she  sent  down  for  a  kitchen-maid;  now  there 
are  about  fifty  kitchen-maids  here  and  I  just  happened  to  be 
handy;  well,  I  gave  her  great  satisfaction,  for  I  have  always 
been  very  good  at  arranging  table-napkins.  And  so  from  that 
day  she  kept  me  with  her  and  trained  me  by  stages  till  I 
became  her  secretary.  And  I’ve  learned  a  great  deal/ 

‘Is  there  so  much  writing  to  be  done  here,  then?’  asked 
Karl. 

‘Oh,  a  great  deal/  she  replied,  ‘more  than  you  would 
imagine.  You  saw  yourself  that  I  was  working  up  to  half-past 
eleven  tonight,  and  that’s  quite  usual.  Of  course,  I  don’t  type 
all  the  time,  for  I  do  lots  of  errands  in  the  town  as  well.’ 


130 


‘What's  the  name  of  this  town  ? '  asked  Karl. 

‘Don’t  you  know?’  she  said.  ‘Rameses/ 

‘Is  it  a  big  town  ?  ’  asked  Karl. 

‘Very  big/  she  replied.  ‘I  -don’t  enjoy  visiting  it.  But 
wouldn’t  you  really  like  to  go  to  sleep  now  ?  ’ 

‘No,  no/  said  Karl,  ‘you  haven’t  told  me  yet  why  you 
came  to  see  me/ 

‘Because  I  have  no  one  to  talk  to.  I’m  not  complaining,  but 
there’s  really  no  one,  and  it  makes  me  happy  to  find  someone 
at  last  who  will  let  me  talk.  I  saw  you  below  in  the  saloon, 
I  was  just  coming  to  fetch  the  Manageress  when  she  took 
you  off  to  the  store-room.' 

‘That  saloon  is  a  terrible  place/  said  Karl. 

‘I  don’t  even  notice  it  these  days,’  she  replied.  ‘But  I  only 
wanted  to  say  that  the  Manageress  is  as  kind  to  me  as  if  she 
were  my  mother.  Yet  there’s  too  great  a  difference  between 
our  positions  for  me  to  speak  freely  to  her.  I  used  to  have 
good  friends  among  the  kitchen-maids,  but  they’ve  all  left 
here  long  ago  and  I  scarcely  know  the  new  girls.  And  besides, 
it  often  seems  to  me  that  the  work  I’m  doing  now  is  a  greater 
strain  than  what  I  did  before,  that  I  don’t  even  do  it  so  well 
as  the  other,  and  that  the  Manageress  keeps  me  on  merely 
out  of  charity.  After  all,  it  really  needs  a  better  education 
than  I  have  had  to  be  a  secretary.  It’s  a  sin  to  say  it,  but  often 
and  often  I  feel  it’s  driving  me  out  of  my  mind.  For  God’s 
sake,’  she  burst  out,  speaking  much  more  rapidly  and  hastily 
touching  Karl’s  shoulder,  since  he  kept  his  hands  below  the 
blankets,  ‘don’t  tell  the  Manageress  a  word  of  this,  or  else 
I’m  really  done  for.  If  besides  worrying  her  by  my  work,  I 
were  to  cause  her  actual  pain  as  well,  that  would  really  be 
too  much.' 

‘Of  course  I  won't  tell  her  anything/  replied  Karl. 

.‘Then  that’s  all  right,'  she  said,  ‘and  you  must  go  on  stay¬ 
ing  here.  I’d  be  glad  if  you  would,  and  if  you  like  we  could 
be  friends.  As  soon  as  I  saw  you,  I  felt  I  could  trust  you.  And 
yet  -  you  see  how  wicked  I  am  -  I  was  afraid  too  that  the 


131 


Manageress  might  make  you  her  secretary  in  my  place  and 
dismiss  me.  It  took  me  a  long  time,  sitting  by  myself  next 
door,  while  you  were  below  in  the  office,  to  straighten  it  all  | 
out  in  my  mind  until  I  saw  that  it  might  actually  be  a  very 
good  thing  if  you  were  to  take  over  my  work,  for  you  cer¬ 
tainly  would  understand  it  better.  If  you  didn’t  want  to  do  i 
the  errands  in  the  town,  I  could  keep  that  job  for  myself. 
But  apart  from  that,  I  would  certainly  be  of  much  more  use 
in  the  kitchen,  especially  as  I’m  stronger  now  than  I  used  I 
to  be.’ 

‘It’s  all  settled  already/  said  Karl,  ‘I’m  to  be  a  lift-boy  and  I 
you’re  to  go  on  being  secretary.  But  if  you  even  hint  at  these : 
plans  of  yours  to  the  Manageress,  I’ll  tell  her  all  you’ve  told  I 
me  tonight,  sorry  as  I  would  be  to  do  it/ 

Karl’s  tone  alarmed  Therese  so  greatly  that  she  flung; 
herself  down  beside  the  sofa,  weeping  and  hiding  her  face  in  i 
the  bed-clothes. 

‘Oh,  I  shan’t  tell/  said  Karl,  ‘but  you  mustn’t  say  anything; 
either/ 

Now  he  could  not  help  coming  a  little  out  from  under  his  i 
coverings,  and  stroked  her  arm  softly,  but  he  did  not  find  the: 
right  words  to  say  and  could  only  reflect  that  this  girl’s  life; 
was  a  bitter  one.  Finally  he  comforted  her  so  far  that  she: 
grew  ashamed  of  her  weeping,  looked  at  him  gratefully, , 
advised  him  to  sleep  long  next  morning,  and  promised,  if  she; 
could  find  time,  to  come  up  at  eight  o’clock  and  waken  him., 

‘You  are  so  clever  at  wakening  people/  said  Karl. 

Tes,  some  things  I  can  do/  she  said,  ran  her  hand  softly i 
over  the  bed-clothes  in  farewell,  and  rushed  off  to  her  room,  j 

Next  day  Karl  insisted  on  beginning  work  at  once, 
although  the  Manageress  wanted  him  to  take  the  day  off  and 
have  a  look  round  the  town.  He  told  her  frankly  that  he 
would  have  plenty  of  opportunities  for  sightseeing  later,  butt 
that  for  the  moment  the  most  important  thing  for  him  wa<- 
to  make  a  start  with  his  job,  for  he  had  already  broken  off 
one  career  in  Europe  to  no  purpose  and  was  now  beginning; 

132 


again  as  a  lift-boy  at  an  age  when  his  contemporaries,  if  they 
were  ambitious,  had  every  expectation  of  being  promoted  to 
more  responsible  work.  It  was  right  and  needful  for  him  to 
begin  as  a  lift-boy,  but  equally  needful  for  him  to  advance 
with  extra  rapidity.  In  these  circumstances  he  would  take 
no  pleasure  at  all  in  strolling  idly  through  Rameses.  He 
would  not  even  consent  to  go  for  a  short  walk  with  Therese, 
when  she  suggested  it.  He  could  not  rid  his  mind  of  the 
idea  that  if  he  did  not  work  hard  he  might  sink  as  low  as 
Delamarche  and  Robinson. 

The  hotel  tailor  fitted  him  for  a  lift-boy’s  uniform,  which 
was  resplendent  enough  with  gold  buttons  and  gold  braid, 
but  made  him  shudder  a  little  when  he  put  it  on,  for  under 
the  arms  particularly  the  short  jacket  was  cold,  stiff  and 
incurably  damp  with  the  sweat  of  the  many  boys  who  had 
worn  it  before  him.  The  jacket  had  to  be  altered  for  Karl, 
especially  over  the  chest,  since  not  one  of  the  ten  spare 
jackets  would  even  meet  upon  him.  Yet  in  spite  of  the 
stitching  that  needed  to  be  done,  and  although  the  master- 
tailor  seemed  to  be.  exacting  in  his  standards  -  twice  he 
pitched  the  uniform  back  into  the  workshop  after  it  was 
apparently  finished  -  the  fitting  was  completed  in  barely  five 
minutes,  and  Karl  left  the  tailor’s  room  already  clad  in  closely 
fitting  trousers  and  a  jacket  which,  in  spite  of  the  master- 
tailor’s  categorical  assurances  to  the  contrary,  was  very  tight 
indeed  and  tempted  Karl  to  indulge  in  breathing  exercises, 
for  he  wanted  to  see  if  it  was  still  possible  to  breathe  at  all. 

Then  he  reported  to  the  Head  Waiter,  under  whose  direc¬ 
tion  he  was  to  be,  a  slender,  handsome  man  with  a  big  nose, 
who  might  well  have  been  in  the  forties.  The  Head  Waiter 
had  no  time  to  exchange  even  a  word  with  him  and  simply 
rang  for  a  lift-boy,  who  chanced  to  be  the  very  one  that  Karl 
had  seen  yesterday.  The  Head  Waiter  called  him  only  by  his 
first  name,  Giacomo,  but  it  took  Karl  some  time  to  identify 
the  name,  for  in  the  English  pronunciation  it  was  unrecog¬ 
nizable.  The  boy  was  instructed  to  show  Karl  all  the  duties 

133 


of  a  lift-boy,  but  he  was  so  shy  and  hasty  that,  little  as  there 
was  actually  to  be  shown,  Karl  could  scarcely  make  out  that 
little  from  him.  No  doubt  Giacomo  was  annoyed  too  because 
he  had  been  removed  from  the  lift  service,  apparently  on 
Karl's  account,  and  had  been  assigned  to  help  the  chamber¬ 
maids,  which  seemed  degrading  in  his  eyes  because  of  certain 
experiences,  which,  however,  he  did  not  divulge.  Karl's 
deepest  disappointment  was  the  discovery  that  a  lift-boy  had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  machinery  of  the  lift  but  to  set  it  in 
motion  by  simply  pressing  a  button,  while  all  repairs  were 
done  exclusively  by  the  mechanics  belonging  to  the  hotel;  for 
example,  in  spite  of  half  a  year's  service  on  the  lift,  Giacomo 
had  never  seen  with  his  own  eyes  either  the  dynamo  in  the 
cellar  or  the  inner  mechanism  of  the  lift,  although,  as  he  said 
himself,  that  would  have  delighted  him.  Indeed  the  work 
was  monotonous,  and  the  twelve-hours'  shifts,  alternately  by 
day  and  night,  were  so  exhausting  that  according  to  Giacomo 
one  simply  could  not  bear  it  if  one  did  not  sleep  on  one's  feet 
for  a  few  minutes  now  and  then.  Karl  made  no  comment,  but 
he  was  perfectly  aware  that  that  very  trick  had  cost  Giacomo 
his  post. 

Karl  was  very  pleased  that  the  lift  he  had  to  attend  to  was 
reserved  for  the  upper  floors,  since  he  would  not  have  to  deal 
with  the  wealthy  guests,  who  were  the  most  exacting.  Still, 
he  would  not  learn  so  much  as  at  the  other  lifts,  and  it  was 
good  only  for  a  beginning. 

After  the  very  first  week  he  realized  that  he  was  quite 
equal  to  the  job.  The  brasswork  in  his  lift  was  the  most 
brightly  polished  of  all;  none  of  the  thirty  other  lifts  had 
anything  to  compare  with  it,  and  it  might  have  been  still 
brighter  if  the  other  boy  who  partnered  him  had  come  any¬ 
where  near  him  in  thoroughness  and  had  not  felt  confirmed 
in  his  negligence  by  Karl's  strict  attention  to  duty.  He  was 
a  native  American  of  the  name  of  Rennell,  a  conceited  youth  i 
with  dark  eyes  and  smooth,  somewhat  hollow  cheeks.  He 
had  an  elegant  suit  of  his  own  which  he  wore  on  his  free 

134 


evenings,  when  he  hurried  off  to  the  town  faintly  smelling 
of  perfume;  now  and  then  he  would  even  ask  Karl  to  take 
his  duty  of  an  evening,  saying  that  he  had  been  called  away 
on  family  business  and  paying  little  heed  to  the  contradiction 
between  such  pretexts  and  his  festive  appearance.  All  the 
same,  Karl  liked  him  quite  well  and  was  pleased  to  see 
Rennell  stopping  beside  the  lift  in  his  fine  suit  before  going 
out  on  one  of  these  evenings,  making  his  excuses  again  while 
he  pulled  on  his  gloves,  and  then  stalking  off  along  the  cor¬ 
ridor.  Besides,  Karl  thought  it  only  natural  that  he  should 
oblige  an  older  colleague  in  this  way  at  the  start;  he  had  no 
intention  of  making  it  a  permanent  arrangement.  For  running 
the  lift  up  and  down  was  tiring  enough  in  itself,  and  especially 
during  the  evening;  there  was  almost  no  respite  from  it. 

So  Karl  also  learned  how  to  make  the  quick,  low  bow 
which  was  expected  of  lift-boys,  and  to  accept  tips  with 
lightning  speed.  They  vanished  into  his  waistcoat  pocket, 
and  no  one  could  have  told  from  his  expression  whether  they 
were  big  or  small.  For  ladies  he  opened  the  door  with  a  little 
air  of  gallantry  and  swung  himself  into  the  lift  slowly  after 
them,  since  in  their  anxiety  about  their  hats,  dresses  and 
fal-lals  they  took  a  longer  time  than  men  to  get  inside.  While 
working  the  lift  he  stood  close  beside  the  door,  since  that 
seemed  the  most  unobtrusive  place,  with  his  back  to  his  pas¬ 
sengers,  holding  the  door-lever  in  his  hand  so  that  he  was 
ready  the  instant  they  arrived  to  slide  the  door  sideways 
without  delaying  or  startling  them.  Only  seldom  did  anyone 
tap  him  on  the  shoulder  during  a  journey  to  ask  some  little 
piece  of  information;  then  he  would  turn  round  smartly  as 
if  he  had  been  expecting  the  request  and  give  the  answer  in 
a  loud  voice.  Often,  particularly  after  the  theatres  or  the 
arrival  of  certain  express  trains,  there  was  such  a  rush,  in 
spite  of  the  numerous  lifts,  that  as  soon  as  he  had  deposited 
one  set  of  passengers  on  the  top  floor  he  had  to  fly  back  again 
for  those  who  were  waiting  below.  It'was  possible,  by  pulling 
on  a  wire  cable  which  passed  through  the  lift,  to  increase  its 

135 


ordinary  speed,  though  this  was  forbidden  by  the  regulations 
and  was  also  supposed  to  be  dangerous.  So  Karl  never  did  it 
while  he  was  carrying  passengers,  but  as  soon  as  he  had 
unloaded  them  upstairs  and  was  returning  for  more,  he  had 
no  scruples  at  all  and  hauled  on  the  cable  with  strong, 
rhythmical  heaves  like  a  sailor.  Besides,  he  knew  that  the 
other  lift-boys  did  it  as  well,  and  he  did  not  want  to  lose  his 
passengers  to  them.  Individual  guests  who  had  been  staying 
in  the  hotel  for  quite  a  long  time  -  a  common  habit  here  - 
showed  occasionally  by  a  smile  that  they  recognized  Karl  as 
their  lift-boy.  These  marks  of  kindness  Karl  accepted  gravely 
but  with  gratitude.  Sometimes,  if  he  were  not  so  rushed  as 
usual,  he  could  take  on  little  errands  as  well,  fetching  some 
trifle  or  other  which  a  guest  had  forgotten  in  his  room  and 
did  not  want  the  trouble  of  going  up  for;  then  Karl  would 
soar  aloft  all  by  himself  in  the  lift,  which  seemed  peculiarly 
his  own  at  such  times,  enter  the  strange  room,  where  curious 
things  which  he  had  never  seen  before  were  lying  about  or 
hanging  on  clothes-pegs,  smell  the  characteristic  odour  of 
some  unfamiliar  soap  or  perfume  or  toothpaste  and  hurry 
back,  not  lingering  even  a  moment,  with  the  required  object, 
though  he  usually  got  the  vaguest  instructions  for  finding  it. 
He  often  regretted  that  he  could  not  go  on  longer  errands, 
which  were  reserved  for  special  attendants  and  message-boys 
equipped  with  bicycles,  even  with  motor-bicycles.  The  utmost 
he  could  do  was  to  undertake  commissions  to  the  dining-room 
or  the  gambling-rooms. 

After  a  twelve-hours’  shift,  coming  off  duty  at  six  o’clock 
in  the  evening  for  three  days  and  for  the  next  three  at  six 
o’clock  in  the  morning,  he  was  so  weary  that  he  went  straight 
to  bed  without  heeding  anyone.  His  bed  was  in  the  lift-boys’ 
dormitory;  the  Manageress,  who  turned  out  to  be  not  quite 
so  influential  as  he  had  thought  on  the  first  evening,  had 
indeed  tried  to  get  him  a  room  for  himself,  and  might  even 
have  succeeded  in  doing  so,  but  when  Karl  saw  what  diffi¬ 
culties  it  caused  and  that  she  had  to  keep  ringing  up  his 

136 


immediate  superior,  the  busy  Head  Waiter,  on  his  account, 
he  refused  it  and  convinced  her  of  the  sincerity  of  his  refusal 
by  telling  her  that  he  did  not  want  to  make  the  other  boys 
jealous  through  receiving  a  privilege  which  he  had  not  really 
earned. 

As  a  quiet  place  to  sleep  in,  the  dormitory  certainly  left 
much  to  be  desired.  For  each  boy  had  his  own  time-table  for 
eating,  sleeping,  recreation  and  incidental  services  during 
his  free  twelve  hours;  so  that  the  place  was  always  in  a 
turmoil.  Some  would  be  lying  asleep  with  blankets  pulled 
over  their  ears  to  deaden  noises,  and  if  one  of  them  were 
roused  he  would  yell  with  such  fury  about  the  din  made  by 
the  rest  that  all  the  other  sleepers,  no  matter  how  soundly 
they  slept,  were  bound  to  waken  up.  Almost  every  boy  had 
a  pipe,  which  was  indulged  in  as  a  sort  of  luxury,  and  Karl 
got  himself  one  too  and  soon  acquired  a  taste  for  it.  Now 
smoking  was  of  course  forbidden  on  duty,  and  the  conse¬ 
quence  was  that  in  the  dormitory  everyone  smoked  if  he  was 
not  actually  asleep.  As  a  result,  each  bed  stood  in  its  own 
smoke  cloud  and  the  whole  room  was  enveloped  in  a  general 
haze.  Although  fhe  majority  agreed  in  principle  that  lights 
should  be  kept  burning  only  at  one  end  of  the  room  during 
the  night,  it  was  impossible  to  enforce  this.  Had  the  sug¬ 
gestion  been  carried  out,  those  who  wanted  to  sleep  could 
have  done  so  in  peace  in  the  half  of  the  room  which  lay  in 
darkness  -  it  was  a  huge  room  with  forty  beds  -  while  the 
others  in  the  lighted  part  could  have  played  at  dice  or  cards 
and  done  all  the  other  things  for  which  light  was  needed.  A 
boy  whose  bed  was  in  the  lighted  half  of  the  room  and  who 
wanted  to  sleep  could  have  lain  down  in  one  of  the  vacant 
beds  in  the  dark  half;  for  there  were  always  enough  beds 
vacant,  and  no  boy  objected  to  another’s  making  a  temporary 
u$e  of  his  bed.  But  it  was  impossible  to  stick  to  this  arrange¬ 
ment  for  even  a  single  night.  There  would  always  be  a  couple 
of  boys,  for  instance,  who  had  taken  advantage  of  the  dark¬ 
ness  to  snatch  some  sleep  and  then  felt  inclined  for  a  game  of 


cards  on  a  board  stretched  between  their  beds;  naturally 
enough  they  switched  on  the  nearest  electric  light,  which 
wakened  up  those  who  were  sleeping  with  their  faces  turned 
towards  its  glare.  Of  course,  one  could  squirm  away  from 
the  light  for  a  while,  but  in  the  end  the  only  thing  to  do  was 
to  start  a  game  of  cards  with  one’s  own  wakeful  neighbour 
and  switch  on  another  light.  And  that  meant  pipes  going 
too,  all  round.  Here  and  there,  to  be  sure,  some  determined 
sleepers  -  among  whom  Karl  was  usually  to  be  counted  - 
burrowed  their  heads  under  the  pillows  instead  of  lying  on  j 
top  of  them;  but  how  was  one  to  go  on  sleeping  if  the  boy 
in  the  next  bed  got  up  in  the  very  middle  of  the  night  for  a  i 
few  hours’  roistering  in  the  town  before  going  on  duty  and 
washed  his  face  with  a  clatter  and  much  scattering  of  water : 
at  the  wash-basin  fixed  at  the  head  of  one's  own  bed,  if  hei 
not  only  put  on  his  boots  noisily  but  even  stamped  them  on  i 
the  floor  to  get  his  feet  thoroughly  into  them  -  most  of  the! 
boys'  boots  were  too  narrow,  in  spite  of  the  shape  of  Ameri¬ 
can  footwear  -  and  if  he  finally,  not  being  able  to  find  some 
trifle  or  other  to  complete  his  toilet,  simply  lifted  one’s  pillow 
off  one's  face,  the  pillow  beneath  which  one  had  of  course 
long  given  up  trying  to  sleep  and  was  waiting  merely  to  let 
fly  at  him?  Now  the  boys  were  also  great  lovers  of  sport,  and 
most  of  them  young,  strong  lads  who  wanted  to  miss  no 
chance  of  training  their  bodies.  So  if  you  were  startled  out 
of  your  sleep  in  the  night  by  an  uproar,  you  were  sure  tc 
find  a  boxing-match  in  full  career  on  the  floor  beside  your 
bed,  while  expert  spectators  in  shirts  and  drawers  stood  on 
all  the  beds  round  about,  with  every  light  turned  on.  It 
happened  once  that  in  such  a  midnight  boxing-match  one  ol 
the  combatants  fell  over  Karl  as  he  was  sleeping,  and  the 
first  thing  that  he  saw  on  opening  his  eyes  was  a  stream  oi 
blood  from  the  boy's  nose  which,  before  anything  could  be 
done  about  it,  bespattered  all  the  bed-clothes.  Karl  often 
spent  nearly  the  whole  of  his  twelve  hours  in  trying  to  ge 
a  few  hours’  sleep.  He  was  strongly  enough  tempted  to  take 

138 


part  in  the  general  fun;  but  then  it  always  came  into  his 
mind  that  the  others  had  gained  a  better  start  in  life  and 
that  he  must  catch  up  on  them  by  harder  work  and  a  little 
renunciation.  So,  although  he  was  eager  to  get  sufficient 
sleep,  chiefly  on  account  of  his  work,  he  complained  neither 
to  the  Manageress  nor  to  Therese  about  the  conditions  in  the 
dormitory;  for  all  the  other  boys  suffered  in  the  same  way 
without  really  grumbling  about  it,  and  besides,  the  tribula¬ 
tions  of  the  dormitory  were  a  necessary  part  of  the  job  which 
he  had  gratefully  accepted  from  the  hands  of  the  Manageress. 

Once  a  week,  on  changing  from  day  to  night  duty,  he  had 
a  free  period  of  twenty-four  hours,  part  of  which  he  devoted 
to  seeing  the  Manageress  once  or  twice  and  exchanging  a 
few  words  with  Therese,  usually  in  some  comer  or  other,  or 
in  a  corridor,  very  rarely  indeed  in  her  room,  whenever  he 
caught  her  off  duty  for  a  moment  or  two.  Sometimes  too  he 
escorted  her  on  her  errands  to  the  town,  which  had  all  to  be 
executed  at  top  speed.  They  would  rush  to  the  nearest  under¬ 
ground  station  almost  at  a  run,  Karl  carrying  the  basket;  the 
journey  flashed  past  in  a  second,  as  if  the  train  were  being 
pulled  through  a  vacuum,  and  they  were  already  getting  out 
and  clattering  up  the  stairs  at  the  other  end  without  waiting 
for  the  lift,  which  was  too  slow  for  them;  then  the  great 
squares  appeared,  from  which  the  streets  rayed  out  star- 
fashion,’ bringing  a  tumult  of  steadily  streaming  traffic  from 
every  side;  but  Karl  and  Therese  stuck  close  together  and 
hurried  to  the  different  offices,  laundries,  warehouses  and 
shops  to  do  the  errands  which  could  not  easily  be  attended 
to  by  telephone,  mostly  purchases  of  a  minor  nature  or 
trifling  complaints.  Therese  soon  noticed  that  Karl’s  assistance 
was  not  to  be  despised;  indeed,  that  in  many  cases  it  greatly 
expedited  matters.  In  his  company  she  had  never  to  stand 
waiting,  as  at  other  times,  for  the  overdriven  shopkeepers  to 
attend  to  her.  He  marched  up  to  the  counter  and  rapped  on  it 
with  his  knuckles  until  someone  came;  in  his  newly  acquired 
and  still  somewhat  pedantic  English,  easy  to  distinguish 

139 


from  a  hundred  other  accents,  he  shouted  across  high  walls 
of  human  beings;  he  went  up  to  people  without  hesitation, 
even  if  they  were  haughtily  withdrawn  into  the  recesses  of 
the  longest  shops.  He  did  all  this  not  out  of  arrogance,  nor 
from  any  lack  of  respect  for  difficulties,  but  because  he  felt 
himself  in  a  secure  position  which  gave  him  certain  rights; 
the  Hotel  Occidental  was  not  to  be  despised  as  a  customer, 
and  after  all,  Therese  sorely  needed  help  in  spite  of  her 
business  experience. 

Tou  should  always  come  with  me/  she  often  said,  laughing 
happily,  when  they  returned  from  a  particularly  successful 
expedition. 

During  the  month  and  a  half  that  Karl  stayed  at  Rameses, 
he  was  only  thrice  in  Therese’s  room  for  long  visits  of  a  few 
hours  at  a  time.  It  was  naturally  smaller  than  the  Mana¬ 
geress’s  rooms;  the  few  things  in  it  were  crowded  round 
the  window;  but  after  his  experiences  in  the  dormitory  Karl 
could  appreciate  the  value  of  a  private,  relatively  quiet  room, 
and  though  he  never  expressly  said  so,  Therese  could  see  how 
much  he  liked  being  there.  She  had  no  secrets  from  him,  and 
indeed  it  would  not  have  been  very  easy  to  keep  secrets  from 
him  after  that  visit  of  hers  on  the  first  night.  She  was  an 
illegitimate  child;  her  father  was  a  foreman  mason  who  had 
sent  for  her  and  her  mother  from  Pomerania;  but  as  if  that  I 
had  been  his  whole  duty,  or  as  if  the  work-worn  woman  and 
the  sickly  child  whom  he  met  at  the  landing-stage  had  dis¬ 
appointed  his  expectations,  he  had  gone  off  to  Canada  with¬ 
out  much  explanation  shortly  after  their  arrival,  and  they  had 
received  neither  a  letter  nor  any  other  word  from  him,  which 
indeed  was  not  wholly  surprising,  for  they  were  lost  beyond 
discovery  among  the  tenements  in  the  east  end  of  New  York. 

On  one  occasion  Therese  told  Karl  -  he  was  standing  beside 
her  at  the  window  looking  down  at  the  street  -  of  her' 
mother’s  death.  How  her  mother  and  she  one  winter  evening ; 
-  she  must  have  been  about  five  then  -  were  hurrying! 
through  the  streets,  each  carrying  a  bundle,  to  find  some: 

140 


shelter  for  the  night.  How  her  mother  had  at  first  taken  her 
hand  -  there  was  a  snowstorm  and  it  was  not  easy  to  make 
headway  -  until  her  own  hand  grew  numb  and  she  let 
Therese  go  without  even  looking  to  see  what  had  become  of 
her,  so  that  the  child  had  to  make  shift  to  hang  on  by  herself 
to  her  mother^  skirts.  Often  Therese  stumbled  and  even  fell, 
but  her  mother  seemed  to  be  beyond  herself  and  went  on 
without  stopping.  And  what  snowstorms  you  got  in  the  long, 
straight  streets  of  New  York !  Karl  had  no  experience  of 
what  winter  in  New  York  was  like.  If  you  walked  against 
the  wind,  which  kept  whirling  round  and  round,  you  could 
not  open  your  eyes  even  for  a  minute,  the  wind  lashed  the 
snow  into  your  face  all  the  time,  you  walked  and  walked  but 
got  no  farther  forward;  it  was  enough  to  make  you  desperate. 
A  child  naturally  was  at  an  advantage  compared  with  a 
grown-up;  it  could  duck  under  the  wind  and  get  through  and 
even  find  a  little  pleasure  in  the  struggle.  So  that  night 
Therese  was  hardly  able  to  understand  her  mother’s  situation, 
and  she  was  now  firmly  convinced  that  if  she  had  only  acted 
then  more  wisely  towards  her  mother  -  of  course,  she  was 
such  a  very  little  girl  -  her  mother  might  not  have  had  to 
die  such  a  wretched  death.  Her  mother  had  had  no  work  at 
all  for  two  days;  her  last  coin  was  gone;  they  had  passed  the 
day  in  the  open  without  a  bite,  and  the  bundles  they  carried 
contained  nothing  but  useless  odds  and  ends  which,  perhaps 
out  of  superstition,  they  did  not  dare  to  throw  away.  There 
was  a  prospect  of  work  the  very  next  morning  at  a  new 
building,  but  Therese’s  mother  was  afraid,  as  she  had  tried 
to  explain  the  whole  day,  that  she  might  not  be  able  to  take 
advantage  of  the  chance,  for  she  felt  dead  tired  and  that 
very  morning  had  coughed  up  a  great  deal  of  blood  in  the 
street  to  the  alarm  of  passers-by;  her  only  wish  was  to  get 
into  some  place  where  she  could  be  warm  and  rest.  And  just 
that  evening  it  was  impossible  to  find  even  a  comer.  Some¬ 
times  a  janitor  would  not  let  them  inside  the  doorway  of  a 
building,  where  they  might  at  least  have  sheltered  a  little 


141 


from  the  cold;  but  if  they  did  get  past  the  janitor  they, 
scurried  through  oppressive,  icy  corridors,  climbed  countlessi 
stairs,  circled  narrow  balconies  overlooking  courtyards,  beat¬ 
ing  upon  doors  at  random,  at  one  moment  not  daring  to 
speak  to  anyone  and  at  another  imploring  everyone  they, 
met;  and  once  or  twice  her  mother  sat  down  breathlessly  on 
a  step  in  some  quiet  stairway,  drew  Therese,  who  was  almost i 
reluctant,  to  her  breast  and  kissed  her  with  painful  insistence 
on  the  lips.  When  Therese  realized  afterwards  that  these 
were  her  mother’s  last  kisses,  she  could  not  understand  how* 
she  could  have  been  so  blind  as  not  to  know  it,  small  creature 
though  she  was.  Some  of  the  doors  they  passed  by  stood 
open  to  let  out  a  stifling  fug;  in  the  smoky  reek  which  filled; 
these  rooms,  as  if  they  were  on  fire,  nothing  could  be 
discerned  but  some  figure  looming  in  the  doorway  who  dis-i 
couraged  them,  either  by  stolid  silence  or  by  a  curt  word  i 
from  expecting  accommodation  within.  On  looking  back 
Therese  thought  it  was  only  in  the  first  few  hours  that  hen 
mother  was  really  seeking  for  a  place  of  shelter,  for  after 
about  midnight  she  spoke  to  no  one  at  all,  although  she  wan 
on  her  feet,  with  brief  interruptions,  until  dawn,  and 
although  these  tenements  never  locked  their  doors  all  nighi 
and  there  was  a  constant  traffic  of  people  whom  she  coulc 
not  help  meeting.  Of  course,  they  were  not  actually  running 
about  from  place  to  place,  but  they  were  moving  as  fast  a.*! 
their  strength  would  permit,  perhaps  in  reality  at  a  kind  oi\ 
crawling  shuffle.  And  Therese  could  not  tell  whether  between! 
midnight  and  five  o’clock  in  the  morning  they  had  been  ii  j 
twenty  buildings,  or  in  two,  or  only  in  one.  The  corridors  03 
these  tenements  were  cunningly  contrived  to  save  space,  bu  ■ 
not  to  make  it  easy  to  find  one’s  way  about;  likely  enougl  ] 
they  had  trailed  again  and  again  through  the  same  corridor  1 
Therese  had  a  dim  recollection  of  emerging  from  the  door  0“ 
a  house  which  they  had  been  traversing  endlessly,  only  t(  i 
turn  back,  or  so  it  seemed  to  her,  when  they  had  reached  the 
street,  and  plunge  again  into  it.  For  a  child  like  her  it  wa^ 

142 


of  course  an  incomprehensible  torture  to  be  dragged  along, 
sometimes  holding  her  mother’s  hand,  sometimes  clinging 
to  her  skirts,  without  a  single  word  of  comfort,  and  in  her 
bewilderment  the  only  explanation  she  could  find  was  that 
her  mother  wanted  to  run  away  from  her.  So  for  safety’s  sake 
Therese  clutched  all  the  more  firmly  at  her  mothers  skirts 
with  one  hand  even  when  her  mother  was  holding  her  by 
the  other  hand,  and  sobbed  at  intervals.  She  did  not  want  to 
be  left  behind  among  these  people  who  went  stamping  up 
the  stairs  before  them  or  came  behind  them,  invisibly,  round 
the  next  turn  of  ' the  stairway  below,  people  who  stood 
quarrelling  in  the  corridors  before  a  door  and  pushed  each 
other  into  it  by  turns.  Drunk  men  wandered  about  the  place 
dolefully  singing,  and  Therese’s  mother  was  lucky  to  slip 
with  her  through'  their  hands,  which  almost  barred  the  way. 
At  such  a  late  hour  of  night,  when  no  one  was  paying  much 
attention  to  anything  and  rights  were  no  longer  insisted 
on,  she  could  certainly  have  cadged  a  place  in  one  of  the 
common  doss-houses  run  by  private  owners,  several  of  which 
they  passed,  but  Therese  was  unaware  of  this  and  her  mother 
was  past  all  thought  of  resting.  Morning  found  them,  at  the 
dawn  of  a  fine  winter  day,  both  leaning  against  a  house  wall; 
perhaps  they  had  slept  for  a  little  while  there,  perhaps  only 
stared  about  them  with  open  eyes.  It  appeared  that  Therese 
had  lost  her  bundle,  and  her  mother  made  to  beat  her  as  a 
punishment  for  her  negligence;  but  Therese  neither  heard 
nor  felt  any  blow.  Then  they  went  on  again  through  the 
wakening  streets,  Therese’s  mother  next  to  the  wall;  they 
crossed  a  bridge,  where  her  mother’s  hand  brushed  rime 
from  the  railing,  and  at  length  -  Therese  accepted  it  as  a 
matter  of  course  at  the  time  but  now  she  could  not  under¬ 
stand  it  -  they  fetched  up  at  the  very  building  where  her 
mother  had  been  asked  to  report  that  morning.  She  did  not 
tell  Therese  whether  to  wait  or  go  away,  and"  Therese  took 
this  as  a  command  to  wait,  since  that  was  what  she  preferred 
to  do.  So  she  sat  down  on  a  heap  of  bricks  and  looked  on 


M3 


while  her  mother  undid  her  bundle,  took  out  a  gay  scrap  of 
material,  and  bound  it  round  the  head-cloth  which  she  had  I 
been  wearing  all  night.  Therese  was  too  tired  even  to  think 
of  helping  her  mother.  Without  giving  in  her  name  at  thei 
foreman’s  office,  as  was  customary,  and  without  inquiring 
of  anyone,  her  mother  began  to  climb  a  ladder,  as  if  she 
already  knew  the  task  that  was  allotted  to  her.  Therese  was| 
surprised  at  this,  since  the  hod-women  usually  worked  om 
ground  level,  mixing  the  lime,  carrying  the  bricks  and  per¬ 
forming  other  simple  duties.  So  she  thought  that  her  mother 
was  going  to  do  some  better-paid  kind  of  work  today,  and! 
sleepily  smiled  up  to  her.  The  building  was  not  very  high  i 
yet,  it  had  hardly  reached  the  first  storey,  though  the  tall  I 
scaffolding  for  the  rest  of  the  structure,  still  without  its 
connecting  boards,  rose  up  into  the  blue  sky.  Reaching  the 
top  of  the  wall,  her  mother  skilfully  skirted  round  the  brick¬ 
layers,  who  went  on  stolidly  setting  brick  on  brick  and  fori 
some  incomprehensible  reason  paid  no  attention  to  her; 
with  gentle  fingers  she  felt  her  way  cautiously  along  a 
wooden  partition  which  served  as  a  railing,  and  Therese; 
dozing  below,  was  amazed  at  such  skill  and  fancied  that  heri 
mother  glanced  at  her  kindly.  But  in  her  course  her  mother 
now  came  to  a  little  heap  of  bricks,  beyond  which  the  railing 
and  obviously  also  the  wall  came  to  an  end;  yet  she  did  no* 
stop  for  that  but  walked  straight  on  to  the  heap  of  bricks 
and  there  her  skill  seemed  to  desert  her,  for  she  knocket 
down  the  bricks  and  fell  sheer  over  them  to  the  ground.  A 
shower  of  bricks  came  after  her  and  then,  a  good  few  minute* 
later,  a  heavy  plank  detached  itself  from  somewhere  ana 
crashed  down  upon  her.  Therese’s  last  memory  of  her  mothe^ 
was  seeing  her  lying  there  in  her  checked  skirt,  which  hao 
come  all  the  way  from  Pomerania,  her  legs  thrown  wide: 
almost  covered  by  the  rough  plank  atop  of  her,  while  people 
came  running  up  from  every  side  and  a  man  shouted  dowr 
angrily  from  the  top  of  the  wall. 

It  was  late  when  Therese  finished  her  story.  She  had  toU 


144 


it  with  a  wealth  of  detail  unusual  for  her,  and  notably  at 
quite  unimportant  passages,  such  as  when  she  described  the 
scaffolding  poles  each  rising  to  heaven  by  itself,  she  had  been 
compelled  to  stop  now  and  then  with  tears  in  her  eyes.  The 
most  trifling  circumstance  of  that  morning  was  still  stamped 
exactly  on  her  memory  after  more  than  ten  years,  and  because 
the  sight  of  her  mother  on  the  half-finished  house-wall  was 
the  last  living- memory  of  her  mother,  and  she  wanted  to 
bring  it  still  more  vividly  before  her  friend,  she  tried  to 
return  to  it  again  after  she  had  ended  her  story,  but  then  she 
faltered,  put  her  face  in  her  hands  and  said  not  another  word. 

Still,  they  had  merry  hours  too  in  Therese's  room.  On  his 
first  visit  Karl  had  seen  a  text-book  of  commercial  corre¬ 
spondence  lying  there  and  had  asked  leave  to  borrow  it.  They 
arranged  at  the 'same  time  that  Karl  should  write  out  the 
exercises  in  the  book  and  bring  them  to  Therese,  who  had 
already  studied  them  as  far  as  her  own  work  required,  for 
correction.  Now  Karl  lay  for  whole  nights  in  his  bed  in  the 
dormitory  with  cotton-wool  in  his  ears,  shifting  into  every 
conceivable  posture  to  relax  himself,  and  read  the  book  and 
scribbled  the  exercises  in  a  little  notebook  with  a  fountain  pen 
which  the  Manageress  had  given  him  in  reward  for  drawing 
up  methodically  and  writing  out  neatly  a  long  inventory  of 
hers.  He  managed  to  turn  to  his  advantage  most  of  the  dis¬ 
tracting1  interruptions  of  the  other  boys  by  perpetually 
asking  them  for  advice  on  small  points  of  the  English  lan¬ 
guage,  so  that  they  grew  tired  of  it  and  left  him  in  peace. 
Often  he  was  amazed  that  the  others  were  so  reconciled  to 
their  present  lot,  that  they  did  not  feel  its  provisional 
character,  nor  even  realize  the  need  to  come  to  a  decision 
about  their  future  occupations,  and  in  spite  of  Karl's  example 
read  nothing  at  all  except  tattered  and  filthy  copies  of 
detective  stories  which  were  passed  from  bed  to  bed. 

At  their  conferences  Therese  now  corrected  Karl's  exer¬ 
cises,  perhaps  rather  too  painstakingly.  Differences  of  opinion 
arose.  Karl  adduced  his  great  New  York  professor  in  his 

145 


support,  but  that  gentleman  counted  for  as  little  with  Therese 
as  the  grammatical  theories  of  the  lift-boys.  She  would  take 
the  fountain  pen  from  Karl’s  hand  and  score  out  the  passages 
which  she  was  convinced  were  erroneous.  But  in  such  dubious 
cases,  although  the  matter  could  hardly  be  brought  before  a 
higher  authority  than  Therese,  Karl  would  score  out,  for  the 
sake  of  accuracy,  the  strokes  which  Therese  had  made  against 
him.  Sometimes  the  Manageress  would  turn  up  and  give  the 
decision  in  Therese’s  favour,  yet  that  was  not  definite,  as 
Therese  was  her  secretary.  At  the  same  time,  however,  she 
would  establish  a  general  amnesty,  for  tea  would  be  made, 
cakes  sent  for  and  Karl  urged  to  tell  stories  about  Europe, 
with  many  interruptions  from  the  Manageress,  who  kept 
inquiring  and  exclaiming,  so  that  he  realized  how  many 
things  had  been  radically  changed  in  a  relatively  short  time, 
and  how  much  had  probably  changed  since  his  own  departure 
and  would  always  go  on  changing. 

Karl  might  have  been  about  a  month  in  Rameses  when  one 
evening  Rennell  said  to  him  in  passing  that  a  man  called 
Delamarche  had  stopped  him  in  front  of  the  hotel  and  ques¬ 
tioned  him  about  Karl.  Having  no  cause  to  make  a  secret  of 
it,  Rennell  had  replied,  truthfully  that  Karl  was  a  lift-boy 
but  had  prospects  of  getting  a  much  better  post  because  of 
the  interest  the  Manageress  took  in  him.  Karl  noted  how 
carefully  Delamarche  had  handled  Rennell,  for  he  had 
actually  invited  him  to  a  meal  that  evening. 

T  want  nothing  more  to  do  with  Delamarche/  said  Karl, 
‘and  you’d  better  be  on  your  guard  against  him  too  !’ 

‘Me?’  said  Rennell,  stretching  himself  and  hurrying  off. 
He  was  the  best-looking  youngster  in  the  hotel,  and  it  was 
rumoured  among  the  other  boys,  though  no  one  knew  who 
had  started  the  story,  that  a  fashionable  lady  who  had  been 
staying  in  the  hotel  for  some  time  had  kissed  him,  to  say  the 
least  of  it,  in  the  lift.  Those  who  knew  this  rumour  found  it 
very  titillating  to  watch  the  self-possessed  lady  passing  by 
with  her  calm,  light  step,  her  filmy  veil  and  tightly  laced 

146 


figure,  for  her  external  appearance  gave  not  the  slightest 
indication  that  such  behaviour  was  possible  on  her  part.  She 
stayed  on  the  first  floor,  which  was  not  served  by  Rennell’s 
lift,  but  one  could  not  of  course  forbid  guests  to  enter  another 
lift  if  their  own  lifts  were  engaged  at  the  moment.  So  now 
and  then  it  happened  that  she  used  Karl's  and  Rennell’s  lift, 
yet  only  when  Rennell  was  on  duty.  This  might  have  been 
chance,  but  nobody  believed  it,  and  when  the  lift  started  off 
with  the  two  of  them,  there  was  an  almost  uncontrollable 
excitement  among  the  lift-boys  which  actually  made  it  neces¬ 
sary  once  for  the  Head  Waiter  to  intervene.  Now,  whether 
the  lady  or  the  rumour  was  the  cause,  the  fact  remained  that 
Rennell  was  changing,  he  had  become  much  more  self- 
confident,  he  left  the  polishing  of  the  lift  entirely  to  Karl, 
who  was  only  waiting  for  the  chance  of  a  radical  explanation 
on  this  point,  and  no  longer. was  to  be  seen  in  the  dormitory. 
No  other  boy  had  so  completely  deserted  the  community  of 
the  lift-boys,  for,  at  least  in  questions  concerning  their  work, 
they  generally  held  strictly  together  and  had  an  organization 
of  their  own  which  was  recognized  by  the  hotel  management. 

All  this  flashed  through  Karl’s  mind,  together  with 
reflections  on  Delamarche,  but  he  went  on  with  his  work  as 
usual.  Towards  midnight  he  had  a  little  diversion,  for 
Therese,  who  often  surprised  him  with  small  gifts,  brought 
him  a  big  apple  and  a  bar  of  chocolate.  They  talked  together 
for  a  while,  scarcely  conscious  of  the  interruptions  caused  by 
the  lift  journeys.  They  came  to  speak  of  Delamarche,  and 
Karl  realized  that  he  must  really  have’  let  himself  be 
influenced  by  Therese  in  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  he 
was  a  dangerous  man,  for  after  what  Karl  had  told  her  that 
was  Therese’s  opinion  of  him.  Karl  himself  believed  that  he 
was  only  a  shiftless  creature  who  had  let  himself  be 
demoralized  by  ill-luck  and  would  be  easy  enough  to  get  on 
with.  But  Therese  contradicted  him  Violently,  and  in  a  long 
harangue  insisted  that  he  should  promise  never  to  speak  to 
Delamarche  again.  Instead  of  giving  the  promise,  Karl  kept 

147 


urging  her  to  go  to  bed,  for  midnight  was  long  since  past, 
and  when  she  refused,  he  threatened  to  leave  his  post  and 
take  her  to  her  room.  When  at  last  she  was  ready  to  go,  he 
said :  ‘Why  bother  yourself  so  needlessly,  Therese?  If  it  will 
make  you  sleep  any  better.  I’m  ready  to  promise  that  I  won't- 
speak  to  Delamarche  unless  I  can’t  avoid  it.'  Then  came  a 
crowd  of  passengers,  for  the  boy  in  the  neighbouring  lift  had 
been  withdrawn  for  some  other  duty  and  Karl  had  to  attend 
to  both  lifts.  Some  of  the  guests  grumbled  at  the  dislocation, 
and  a  gentleman  who  was  escorting  a  lady  actually  tapped 
Karl  lightly  with  his  walking  cane  to  make  him  hurry,  an 
admonition  which  was  quite  unnecessary.  It  would  not  have 
been  so  bad  if  the  guests,  when  they  saw  that  one  lift  was 
unattended,  had  made  directly  for  Karl’s  lift;  but  instead  ol 
that  they  drifted  to  the  next  lift  and  stood  there  holding  the 
handle  of  the  door  or  even  walked  right  into  the  lift,  an  aci 
which  the  lift-boys  were  expressly  forbidden  by  the  regula . 
tions  to  permit  in  any  circumstances.  So  Karl  had  to  rush  up] 
and  down  until  he  was  quite  exhausted,  without  earning  the 
consciousness  that  he  was  efficiently  fulfilling  his  duty.  Or 
top  of  this,  towards  three  o’clock  in  the  morning  a  luggage 
porter,  an  old  man  with  whom  he  was  on  fairly  friendly 
terms,  asked  some  slight  help  from  him  which  he  could  no 
give,  for  guests  were  standing  before  both  his  lifts  and  i 
required  all  his  presence  of  mind  to  decide  immediately 
which  group  to  take  first.  He  was  consequently  relieve* 
when  the  other  boy  came  back,  and  he  called  out  a  few  word 
of  reproach  to  him  because  he  had  stayed  away  so  long 
although  it  was  probably  no  fault  of  his. 

After  four  o’clock  a  lull  set  in  which  Karl  badly  needec 
He  leant  wearily  against  the  balustrade  beside  his  lift  slowk 
eating  the  apple,  which  gave  out  a  strong  fragrance  as  sooi 
as  he  bit  into  it,  and  gazed  down  into  a  lighted  shaft  sin 
rounded  by  the  great  windows  of  the  store-rooms,  behin 
which  hanging  masses  of  bananas  gleamed  faintly  in  th 

darkness. 


6.  The  Case  of  Robinson 


Then  someone  tapped  him  on  the  shoulder.  Karl,  who 
naturally  thought  it  was  a  guest,  hastily  stuck  the  apple  in 
his  pocket  and  hurried  to  the  lift  almost  without  glancing 
at  the  man. 

‘Good  evening,  Mr  Rossmann,'  said  the  man,  ‘it’s  me, 
Robinson.' 

‘But  you  look  quite  different,'  said  Karl,  shaking  his  head. 

‘Yes,  I’m  doing  well,'  said  Robinson,  contemplating  his 
clothes,  which  consisted  of  garments  that  might  have  been 
fine  enough  separately  but  were  so  ill-assorted  that  they 
looked  positively  shabby.  What  struck  the  eye  most  was  a 
white  waistcoat,  obviously  worn  for  the  first  time,  with  four 
little  black-bordered  pockets,  to  which  Robinson  tried  to 
draw  attention  by  expanding  his  chest. 

‘These  things  of  yours  are  expensive,'  said  Karl,  and  he 
thought  in  passing  of  his  good  simple  suit,  in  which  he 
could  have  held  his  own  even  with  Rennell,  but  which  his 
two  bad  friends  had  sold. 

‘Yes,’  said  Robinson  ‘I  buy  myself  something  nearly  every 
day.  How  do  you  like  the  waistcoat  ? ' 

‘Quite  well,'  said  Karl. 

‘But  these  aren’t  real  pockets,  they’re  just  made  to  look 
like  pockets,’  said  Robinson,  taking  Karl’s  hand  so  that  he 
might  prove  it  for  himself.  But  Karl  recoiled,  for  an  unen¬ 
durable  reek  of  brandy  came  from  Robinson’s  mouth. 

‘You’ve  started  drinking  again,’  Said  Karl,  going  back  to 
the  balustrade. 

‘No,’  said  Robinson,  ‘not  very  much,’  and  he  added, 


149 


contradicting  his  first  complacency :  "What  else  can  a  man  do 
in  this  world?’  A  lift  journey  interrupted  their  talk,  and 
scarcely  had  Karl  reached  the  bottom  again  when  a  telephone 
message  came  asking  him  to  fetch  the  hotel  doctor,  for  a  lady 
on  the  seventh  floor  had  fainted.  During  this  errand  Karl 
secretly  hoped  that  Robinson  would  have  disappeared  before 
he  returned,  for  he  did  not  want  to  be  seen  with  him  and, 
thinking  of  Therese’s  warning,  did  not  want  to  hear  about 
Delamarche  either.  But  Robinson  was  still  waiting  with  the 
wooden  gravity  of  a  very  drunk  man  just  as  a  high  hotel 
official  in  frock-coat  and  top-hat  went  past,  fortunately,  as  it 
seemed,  without  paying  any  attention  to  the  intruder. 

‘Wouldn’t  you  like  to  come  and  see  us,  Rossmann?  We’re 
living  in  great  style  now/  said  Robinson,  leering  seductively 
at  Karl. 

‘Does  the  invitation  come  from  you  or  from  Delamarche?' 
asked  Karl. 

‘From  me  and  Delamarche.  Both  of  us  together/  said 
Robinson. 

‘Then  let  me  tell  you,  and  you  can  pass  it  on  to  Dela¬ 
marche:  that  break  between  us,  if  it  wasn’t  obvious  enough 
to  you  at  the  time,  was  final.  You  two  have  done  me  more 
harm  than  anyone  else  has  ever  done.  Can  you  have  taken 
it  into  your  heads  not  to  leave  me  in  peace  even  now  ?  ’ 

‘But  we’re  your  friends/  said  Robinson  disgustingly, 
maudlin  tears  rising* to  his  eyes.  ‘Delamarche  asked  me  to 
tell  you  that  he’ll  make  it  all  up  to  you.  We’re  living  now 
with  Brunelda,  a  lovely  singer.’  And  at  the  name  he  started 
to  sing  in  a  high  quavering  voice,  but  Karl  silenced  him  in 
time,  hissing  at  him :  ‘Shut  your  mouth  this  minute;  don’t 
you  know  where  you  are  ?  ’ 

‘Rossmann/  said  Robinson,  intimidated  as  far  as  singing 
was  concerned,  ‘I’m  a  friend  of  yours,  I  am;  say  what  you 
like.  And  now  you’ve  got  such  a  fine  job  here,  couldn’t  you 
lend  me  something  ?  ’ 

‘You  would  only  drink  it/  said  Karl.  ‘Why,  I  can  see  a 
150 


brandy  bottle  in  your  pocket,  and  you  must  have  been 
drinking  out  of  it  while  I  was  away,  for  you  were  fairly 
sober  at  the  start/ 

That’s  only  to  strengthen  me  when  I’m  out  on  a  journey/ 
said  Robinson  apologetically. 

‘Well,  I’m  not  going  to  bother  about  you  any  more/  said 
Karl.  jjj 

‘But  what  about  the  money?’  said  Robinson,  opening  his 
eyes  wide. 

‘I  suppose  Delamarche  told  you  to  bring  jnoney  back.  All 
right,  I’ll  give  you  some  money,  but  only  on  condition  that 
you  go  away  at  once  and  never  come  here  again.  If  you  want 
to  get  in  touch  with  me,  you  can  write  me  a  letter;  Karl 
Rossmann,  Lift  Boy,  Hotel  Occidental,  will  always  find  me. 
But  I  tell  you  again,  you  must  never  come  looking  for  me 
here.  I’m  in  service  here  and  I  have  no  time  for  visitors.  Well, 
will  you  have  the  money  on  these  conditions?’  asked  Karl, 
puting  his  hand  into  his  waistcoat  pocket,  for  he  had  made  up 
his  mind  to  sacrifice  the  tips  he  had  received  that  night. 
Robinson  merely  nodded  in  answer  to  the  question,  breathing 
heavily.  Karl  interpreted  this  wrongly  and  asked  again:  ‘Yes 
or  no?’ 

Then  Robinson  beckoned  him  nearer  and  with  writhings 
which  told  their  own  story  whispered:  ‘Rossmann,  I  feel 
awfully  rick.’ 

‘What  the  devil!’  cried  Karl,  and  with  both  hands  he 
dragged  him  to  the  stair  railings.  And  a  stream  poured  from 
Robinson’s  mouth  into  the  deep.  In  the  pauses  of  his  sickness 
he  felt  helplessly  and  blindly  for  Karl. 

‘You’re  a  good  lad,’  he  would  say  then,  or:  ‘It’s  stopped 
now,’  which  however  was  far  short  of  being  the  case,  or: 
‘The  swine,  what  sort  of  stuff  is  this  they  have  poured  into 
me!’  In  his  agitation  and  loathing  Karl  could  not  bear  to 
stay  beside  him  any  longer  and  began  to  walk  up  and  down. 
Here,  in  this  comer  beside  the  lift,  Robinson  was  not  likely 
to  be  seen,  but  what  if  someone  should  notice  him,  one  of 


151 


these  rich  and  fussy  guests  who  were  always  waiting  to  com¬ 
plain  to  the  first  hotel  official  they  saw,  who  would  revenge 
himself  for  it  on  the  whole  staff  in  his  fury;  or  what  if  he 
were  seen  by  one  of  these  hotel  detectives,  who  were  always 
being  changed  and  consequently  were  known  only  to  the 
hotel  management,  so  that  one  suspected  a  detective  in  every 
man  who  peered  at  things,  though  he  might  be  merely  short¬ 
sighted?  And  some  waiter  down  below  only  needed  to  go  to 
the  store-rooms  to  fetch  something  -  for  the  restaurant  buffet 
went  on  all  night  -  to  be  shocked  at  the  sight  of  the  disgusting 
mess  at  the  foot  of  the  shaft  and  telephone  to  Karl  asking  in 
God’s  name  what  was  wrong  up  there.  Could  Karl  refuse  to 
acknowledge  Robinson  in  that  case?  And  if  he  did  refuse, 
was  not  Robinson  stupid  and  desperate  enough  simply  to 
cling  to  Karl  instead  of  apologizing  ?  And  would  not  Karl  be 
dismissed  at  once,  since  it  was  unheard  of  for  a  lift-boy,  the 
lowest  and  most  easily  replaced  member  of  the  stupendous 
hierarchy  of  the  hotel  staff,  to  allow  a  friend  of  his  to  defile 
the  hotel  and  perhaps  even  drive  away  guests  ?  Could  a  lift¬ 
boy  be  tolerated  who  had  such  friends,  and  who  allowed 
them  actually  to  visit  him  during  working  hours  ?  Did  it  not 
look  as  if  such  a  lift-boy  must  himself  be  a  drunkard  or  even 
worse,  for  what  assumption  was  more  natural  than  that  he 
stuffed  his  friends  with  food  from  the  hotel  stores  until  they 
could  not  help  defiling,  as  Robinson  had  done,  any  part  of 
this  scrupulously  clean  hotel  they  happened  to  be  in  ?  And 
why  should  such  a  boy  restrict  himself  to  stealing  food  and 
drink,  since  he  had  literally  innumerable  opportunities  for 
theft  because  of  the  notorious  negligence  of  the  guests,  the  j 
wardrobes  standing  open  everywhere,  the  valuables  lying 
about  on  tables,  the  caskets  flung  wide  open,  the  keys  thrown 
down  at  random  ? 

Just  then  Karl  spied  in  the  distance  a  number  of  guests 
coming  upstairs  from  a  beer-cellar,  in  which  a  variety  per¬ 
formance  had  newly  finished.  He  stationed  himself  beside 
his  lift  and  did  not  dare  even  to  look  round  at  Robinson  for 


152 


fear  of  what  he  might  see.  It  gave  him  little  comfort  that  no 
sound,  not  even  a  groan,  was  to  be  heard  from  that  direction. 
He  attended  to  his  guests  and  kept  going  up  and  down  with 
them,  but  he  could  not  quite  conceal  his  distraction  and  on 
every  downward  journey  was  prepared  to  encounter  some 
catastrophic  surprise. 

At  last  he  had  time  to  look  after  Robinson,  who  was 
cowering  abjectly  in  his  comer  with  his  face  pressed  against 
his  knees.  He  had  pushed  his  hard  round  hat  far  back  off 
his  brow. 

‘You  must  really  go  now/  said  Karl  softly  but  firmly. 
‘Here  is  the  money.  If  you're  quick  I  can  find  time  to  show 
you  the  shortest  way/ 

Til  never  be  able  to  move/  said  Robinson,  wiping  his 
forehead  with  a  minute  handkerchief,  ‘I’ll  just  die  here.  You 
can’t  imagine  how  bad  I  feel.  Delamarche  takes  me  into  all 
his  expensive  drinking-dens;  but  I  can’t  stand  the  silly  stuff 
you  get  here;  I  tell  him  that  every  day/ 

‘Well,  you  simply  can’t  stay  here/  said  Karl.  ‘Remember 
where  you  are.  If  you’re  discovered  here  you’ll  get  into 
trouble  and  I’ll  lose  my  job.  Do  you  want  that?’ 

‘I  can’t  get  up,’  said  Robinson.  ‘I’d  rather  jump  down 
there/  and  he  pointed  between  the  stair  railings  down 
into  the  air-shaft.  ‘As  long  as  I  sit  here  like  this,  I  can 
bear  it,  but  I  can’t  get  up;  I  tried  it  once  while  you  were 
away.’ 

‘Then  I’ll  fetch  a  taxi  to  take  you  to  the  hospital/  said 
Karl,  tugging  a  little  at  Robinson’s  legs,  for  he  seemed  in 
danger  of  subsiding  into  complete  lethargy  at  any  moment. 
But  as  soon  as  he  heard  the  word  hospital,  which  seemed  to 
rouse  horrible  associations,  he  began  to  weep  loudly  and  held 
out  his  hands  to  Karl,  as  if  begging  for  mercy. 

‘Be  quiet,’  said  Karl,  and  he  struck  down  Robinson’s  hands, 
ran  across  to.  the  lift-boy  whose  work*  he  had  taken  on  that 
night,  begged  him  to  oblige  him  in  return  for  a  little  while, 
hurried  back  to  Robinson,  who  was  still  sobbing,  jerked  him 

153 


violently  to  his  feet  and  whispered  to  him :  Tobinson,  if  you 
want  me  to  help  you,  you  must  pull  yourself  together  and  try. 
to  hold  yourself  straight  for  a  short  distance.  I'm  going 
to  take  you  to  my  bed,  where  you  can  stay  till  you  feel 
better  again.  You’ll  be  surprised  how  quickly  you’ll  re¬ 
cover.  But  now  you  must  really  behave  sensibly,  for  there 
are  all  sorts  of  people  in  the  passages  and  my  bed  is  in  a 
big  dormitory.  If  you  attract  even  the  slightest  attention, 
I  can  do  nothing  more  for  you.  And  you  must  keep  your 
eyes  open;  I  can’t  cart  you  about  if  you  look  as  if  you  were 
on  the  point  of  death.’ 

Til  do  everything  you  tell  me/  said  Robinson,  "but  you 
won’t  manage  to  hold  me  up  by  yourself.  Can’t  you  get 
Rennell  too?’ 

‘Rennell  isn’t  here,’  said  Karl. 

‘Oh,  of  course,’  said  Robinson,  ‘Rennell’s  with  Delamarche 
The  two  of  them  sent  me  to  see  you.  I’ve  got  all  mixed  up. 
Karl  took  advantage  of  these  and  other  incomprehensible 
monologues  of  Robinson  to  push  him  along,  and  withou 
accident  managed  to  get  him  as  far  as  a  comer,  from  whicl  | 
a  more  dimly  lit  passage  led  to  the  lift-boys’  dormitory.  Aj 
lift-boy  came  running  towards  them  and  passed  them  at  ful 
speed  just  at  that  moment.  Until  now  they  had  had  only 
harmless  encounters;  between  four  and  five  was  the  quietes^ 
time;  and  Karl  was  well  aware  that  if  he  could  noit  get  ric 
of  Robinson  now,  there  was  no  hope  of  doing  so  in  the  early 
morning,  after  the  day’s  work  had  begun. 

At  the  far  end  of  the  dormitory  a  big  fight  or  an  entertain 
ment  of  some  kind  was  going  on;  he  could  hear  the  rhyth  j 
mical  clapping  of  hands,  the  agitated  stamping  of  feet,  anc 
shouts  of  encouragement.  In  the  part  of  the  dormitory  neaa 
the  door  a  very  few  sound  sleepers  were  to  be  seen  in  the 
beds;  the  majority  lay  on  their  backs  staring  at  the  roofl|j 
while  here  and  there  a  boy,  clothed  or  unclothed  as  he  chancec 
to  be,  sprang  out  of  bed  to  see  how  things  were  going  at  thel 
other  end  of  the  room.  So  Karl  managed  to  guide  Robinsod 


154 


who  had  now  become  somewhat  used  to  walking,  as  far  as 
RennelTs  bed  without  rousing  much  attention,  for  the  bed 
was  quite  near  the  door  and  luckily  unoccupied;  in  his  own 
bed,  as  he  could  see  from  the  distance,  a  strange  boy  whom 
he  did  not  know  was  quietly  sleeping.  As  soon  as  Robinson 
felt  the  bed  under  him  he  went  to  sleep  at  once,  with  one  leg 
hanging  outside. 

Karl  drew  the  blankets  quite  over  Robinson's  face  and 
thought  there  was  no  need  to  worry  for  the  time  being,  as 
the  man  was  not  likely  to  waken  before  sb^  at  the  earliest, 
and  by  then  he  would  be  here  himself  and  perhaps  with 
RennelTs  help  would  find  some  means  of  smuggling  him  out 
of  the  hotel.  The  dormitory  was  never  inspected  by  the 
higher  authorities  of  the  hotel,  except  on  extraordinary 
occasions;  several' years  previously  the  lift-boys  had  succeeded 
in  abolishing  the  routine  inspections  which  had  been  cus¬ 
tomary  before  then;  so  from  that  side  there  was  nothing  to 
be  feared  either. 

When  Karl  got  back  to  his  lift  again,  he  saw  that  both  his 
own  lift  and  its  neighbour  were  vanishing  upwards.  He 
waited  in  some  trepidation  for  this  to  explain  itself.  His  own 
lift  came  down  first,  and  out  of  it  stepped  the  boy  who  had 
run  past  him  in  the  passage  a  little  while  before. 

‘Here,  where  have  you  been,  Rossmann?’  he  asked.  ‘Why 
did  you  £o  away?  Wky  didn’t  you  report  your  absence?' 

‘But  I  asked  him  to  attend  to  my  lift  for  a  minute,'  said 
Karl,  indicating  the  boy  in  the  next  lift,  which  had  just 
arrived.  ‘I  did  as  much  for  him  for  two  whole  hours  when 
the  traffic  was  at  its  worst.' 

‘That’s  all  very  well,’  said  the  boy  in  question,  ‘but  it 
won’t  do.  Don’t  you  know  that  you  must  report  even  the 
shortest  absence  from  duty  to  the  Head  Waiter’s  office? 
That’s  what  the  telephone’s  there  for.  I’d  have  been  glad  to  do 
your  work,,  but  you  know  yourself*  that  it  isn’t  so  easy. 
There  was  a  crowd  of  new  arrivals  off  the  4.30  express 
standing  at  both  the  lifts.  I  couldn’t  take  your  lift  first  and 

1 55 


leave  my  own  guests  waiting  could  I,  so  I  just  went  up  first 
in  my  own  lift  !’ 

'Well?'  asked  Karl  tensely,  as  both  boys  fell  silent. 

‘Well/  said  the  boy  from  the  next  lift,  ‘that  was  the  very 
moment  the  Head  Waiter  came  along  and  saw  the  people 
waiting  before  your  lift  and  no  one  attending  to  it;  he  flew 
into  a  rage  and  asked  me,  for  I  was  on  the  spot  in  no  time, 
where  you  were;  of  course  I  had  no  idea,  for  you  didn’t  even 
tell  me  where  you  were  going;  and  so  he  telephoned  straight 
off  to  the  dormitory  for  another  boy  to  come  at  once.’ 

‘I  met  you  in  the  passage,  didn’t  I?’  asked  the  new  boy, 
Karl  nodded. 

‘Of  course,’  the  other  boy  assured  him,  ‘I  told  him  at  once 
that  you  had  asked  me  to  take  your  place,  but  would  he 
listen  to  excuses?  You  don’t  seem  to  know  him  yet.  And  we 
were  to  tell  you  that  you’re  to  go  to  the  office  at  once.  Sc 
you’d  better  not  wait  any  longer,  but  just  leg  it.  Perhaps  he’ll 
let  you  off  after  all;  you  weren’t  away  for  more  than  two 
minutes  really.  You  just  stick  to  it  that  you  asked  me  to  tak& 
your  place.  Better  not  mention  that  you  took  mine  though 
that’s  my  advice;  nothing  can  happen  to  me,  for  I  had  leavt 
of  absence;  but  there  isn’t  any  good  in  mentioning  that  anci 
mixing  it  up  with  this  business,  since  it  has  nothing  to  dt 
with  it.’ 

‘It’s  the  first  time  I  have  ever  left  my  post,’  said  Karl. 

‘It  always  happens  like  that,  but  nobody  believes  it,’  sai* 
the  boy,  running  to  his  lift,  for  there  were  people  coming. 

Karl’s  deputy,  a  boy  of  about  fourteen,  who  obviously  fel  I 
sorry  for  Karl,  said :  ‘They’ve  let  boys  off  this  kind  of  thin_* 
often  enough  already.  Usually  they  shift  you  to  a  differen 
job.  As  far  as  I  know,  they’ve  only  once  made  it  the  sacH 
You  must  think  up  a  good  excuse.  But  don’t  try  to  tell  hirj 
that  you  suddenly  felt  sick;  that’ll  only  make  him  laugl 
Much  better  say  that  a  guest  sent  you  on  an  urgent  erran 
to  another  guest,  but  you  can’t  remember  who  the  first  guej- 
was  and  you  weren’t  able  to  find  the  other  one,’ 

156 


'Well/  said  Karl,  'it  won't  be  so  very  bad/  After  all  he 
had  heard,  he  could  not  believe  that  the  affair  would  end 
well.  Even  if  this  act  of  negligence  were  condoned,  Robinson 
was  lying  there  in  the  dormitory  as  a  living  offence,  and  it 
was  only  too  probable  that  the  Head  Waiter,  vindictive  as  he 
was,  w'ould  not  be  content  with  a  superficial  investigation 
and  would  light  on  Robinson  at  last.  It  was  true  that  there 
was  no  express  prohibition  against  taking  strangers  into  the 
dormitory,  but  that  prohibition  did  not  exist  simply  because 
there  was  no  point  in  mentioning  what  was  unthinkable. 

When  Karl  entered  the  office  the  Head  Waiter  was  sitting 
over  his  morning  coffee,  taking  an  occasional  sip  and  study¬ 
ing  a  list  which  had  apparently  been  brought  him  by  the 
Head  Porter,  who  was  also  there.  The  latter  was  a  tall  bulky 
man,  whose  splendid  and  richly-ornamented  uniform  -  even 
its  shoulders  and  sleeves  were  heavy  with  gold  chains  and 
braid  -  made  him  look  still  more  broad-shouldered  than  he 
actually  was.  His  gleaming  black  moustache  drawn  out  to 
two  points  in  the  Hungarian  fashion  never  stirred  even  at  the 
most  abrupt  movement  of  his  head.  Also,  because  of  his  stiff, 
heavy  clothing,  the  man  could  move  only  with  difficulty 
and  always  stood  with  his  legs  planted  wide  apart,  so  that  his 
weight  might  be  evenly  distributed. 

Karl  entered  boldly  and  quickly,  as  he  was  used  to  do  in 
the  hotel;  for  that  slowness  and  circumstance  which  passes 
for  politeness  among  private  persons  is  looked  upon  as  lazi¬ 
ness  in  lift-boys.  Besides,  he  must  not  appear  to  be  conscious 
of  guilt  on  his  very  entrance.  The  Head  Waiter  glanced  up 
fleetingly  when  the.  door  opened,  but  then  immediately 
returned  to  his  coffee  and  his  reading  without  paying  any 
further  attention  to  Karl.  But  the  porter  seemed  to  be  annoyed 
at  Karl’s  presence;  perhaps  he  had  some  secret  information 
or  .request  to  impart;  at  any  rate  he  glared  angrily  at  Karl 
every  few  minutes  with  his  head  stiffly  inclined,  and  when¬ 
ever  his  eyes  met  Karl’s,  which  was  clearly  what  he  wanted, 
he  turned  away  at  once  to  the  Head  Waiter  again.  Yet  Karl 


thought  he  would  be  ill-advised  to  quit  the  office,  now  that 
he  was  here,  without  an  express  order  to  do  so  from  the  Head 
Waiter.  But  the  Head  Waiter  was  still  studying  his  list  and 
meanwhile  eating  a  piece  of  cake,  from  which  he  now  and 
then  shook  the  sugar,  without  interrupting  his  reading. 
Once  a  sheet  of  the  list  fell  to  the  floor;  the  porter  did  not! 
even  make  any  attempt  to  pick  it  up,  for  he  knew  he  could 
not,  nor  was  it  at  all  necessary,  since  Karl  pounced  on  the 
paper  and  reached  it  to  the  Head  Waiter,  who  accepted  itl 
with  a  casual  movement  of  his  hand,  as  if  it  had  flown  of  its 
own  accord  from  the  floor.  The  little  service  had  availed  1 
nothing,  for  the  porter  went  on  darting  his  angry  looks  at; 
Karl. 

In  spite  of  that,  Karl  now  felt  more  composed.  The  very 
fact  that  his  offence  seemed  to  have  so  little  importance  for 
the  Head  Waiter  might  be  taken  as  a  good  sign.  After  all,  it" 
was  perfectly  understandable.  A  lift-boy  was  of  no  importance 
and  so  could  not  take  any  liberties,  but  just  because  he  wasi 
of  no  importance,  any  offence  he  committed  could  not  be 
taken  very  seriously.  After  all,  the  Head  Waiter  himself  hadl 
begun  as  a  lift-boy  -  indeed  his  career  was  the  boast  of  the 
present  generation  of  lift-boys  -  it  was  he  who  had  first! 
organized  the  lift-boys,  and  certainly  he  too  must  have  left! 
his  post  occasionally  without  permission,  though  nobody 
could  force  him  now  to  remember  that,  and  though  it  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  his  having  been  a  lift-boy  made  him 
all  the  more  severe  and  unrelenting  in  keeping  the  lift-boys: 
in  order.  But  Karl  also  drew  hope  from  the  steadily  passing;: 
minutes.  According  to  the  office  clock  it  was  now  more  than 
a  quarter-past  five;  Rennell  might  come  back  at  any  moment, 
perhaps  he  was  back  already,  for  he  must  have  noticed  that 
Robinson  did  not  return,  and  in  any  case  Delamarche  and 
Rennell  could  not  have  been  very  far  from  the  Hotel  Occi¬ 
dental,  it  occurred  to  Karl,  for  otherwise  Robinson,  in  his 
wretched  condition,  would  never  have  reached  it.  Now,  if 
Rennell  found  Robinson  in  his  bed,  which  was  bound  tc 

158 


happen,  then  everything  would  be  all  right.  For  practical  as 
Rennell  was,  especially  where  his  own  interests  were  con¬ 
cerned,  he  would  soon  get  Robinson  out  of  the  hotel  in  some 
way  or  other,  which  would  be  all  the  easier  as  Robinson  must 
have  recovered  somewhat  by  now,  and  Delamarche  was 
probably  waiting  outside  the  hotel  to  take  charge  of  him. 
But  once  Robinson  was  got  rid  of,  Karl  could  encounter  the 
Head  Waiter  with  a  much  quieter  mind  and  for  this  time 
perhaps  escape  with  a  reprimand,  though  a  severe  one.  Then 
he  would  consult  with  Therese  whether  he  should  tell  the 
Manageress  the  whole  truth  -  for  his  part  he  could  see 
nothing  against  it  -  and  if  that  could  be  done,  then  the 
matter  could  be  finally  disposed  of  without  much  harm  done. 

Karl  had  just  reassured  himself  somewhat  by  these  reflec¬ 
tions  and  was  beginning  unobtrusively  to  count  over  the  tips 
he  had  taken  that  night,  since  he  had  a  feeling  that  they 
were  heavier  than  usual,  when  the  Head  Waiter  laid  the  list 
on  the  table,  saying :  ‘Just  wait  a  minute  longer,  will  you, 
Feodor/  sprang  at  one  bound  to  his  feet  and  yelled  so  loudly 
at  Karl  that  the  boy  could  only  stare  terror-stricken  into  the 
black  cavern  of  his  mouth. 

‘You  were  absent  from  duty  without  leave.  Do  you  know 
what  that  means?  It  means  dismissal.  I’ll  listen  to  no  excuses, 
you  can  keep  your  lying  apologies  to  yourself;  the  fact  that 
you  were  not  there  is  quite  enough  for  me.  If  I  once  pass  that 
over  and  let  you  off,  all  my  forty  lift-boys  will  soon  be  taking 
to  their  heels  during  working  hours,  and  I'll  be  left  to  carry 
my  five  thousand  guests  up  the  stairs  on  my  own  shoulders/ 

Karl  said  nothing.  The  porter  came  nearer  and  gave  a 
downward  tug  to  Karl’s  jacket,  which  was  slightly  creased, 
doubtless  intending  in  this  way  to  draw  the  Head  Waiter’s 
special  attention  to  the  slight  disorder  of  the  uniform. 

•'Perhaps  you  were  suddenly  taken  sick?’  asked  the  Head 
Waiter  craftily. 

Karl  gave  him  a  scrutinizing  look  and  answered :  'No/ 

‘So  you  weren’t  even  sick?’  shouted  the  Head  Waiter  all 


159 


the  more  loudly.  'Then  you  must  have  hit  on  some  remark¬ 
able  new  lie.  What  excuse  are  you  going  to  offer?  Out  with 

a: 

I  didn  t  know  that  I  had  to  telephone  for  permission  to 
leave/ 

That’s  really  priceless/  said  the  Head  Waiter,  and  he 
seized  Karl  by  the  collar  and  almost  slung  him  across  the 
room  till  they  were  both  facing  the  lift  regulations,  which 
were  pinned  to  the  wall.  The  porter  came  on  their  heels. 
'There !  Read  it !’  said  the  Head  Waiter,  pointing  at  one  of 
the  paragraphs.  Karl  thought  that  he  was  to  read  it  to  him¬ 
self.  But  the  Head  Waiter  shouted :  'Aloud  !’ 

Instead  of  reading  the  paragraph  aloud,  Karl  said  to  the 
Head  Waiter,  hoping  that  this  would  appease  him :  ‘I  know- 
the  paragraphs,  for  I  got  a  copy  of  the  regulations  and  read 
them  carefully.  But  it’s  just  the  regulation  one  never  need* 
that  one  forgets  about.  I  have  been  working  for  two  month* 
now  and  I’ve  never  left  my  post  once/ 

'Well,  you’ll  leave  it  now/  said  the  Head  Waiter,  and  he 
went  over  to  the  table,  took  up  the  list  again,  as  if  to  go  oc 
reading  it,  but  instead  smacked  it  down  on  the  table  again 
as  if  it  were  of  no  account,  and  with  a  deep  flush  on  his  brow 
and  cheeks  began  to  stride  up  and  down  the  room.  'All  thk 
trouble  over  a  silly  fool  of  a  boy !  All  this  disturbance  on 
night  duty  !’  he  exclaimed  several  times.  ‘Do  you  know  whcl 
was  left  stranded  down  below  when  this  fellow  here  ran 
away  from  his  lift?’  he  asked,  turning  to  the  porter.  And  h« 
mentioned  a  name  at  which  the  porter,  who  certainly  knew 
all  the  hotel  clients  and  their  standing,  was  so  horror-strickerl 
that  he  had  to  give  a  fleeting  look  at  Karl  to  assure  himsel  I 
that  the  boy  did  exist  who  had  deserted  a  lift  and  left  th« 
bearer  of  that  name  to  wait  a  while  unattended. 

'That’s  awful!’  said  the  porter,  slowly  shaking  his  hea« 
in  stupefaction  over  Karl,  who  watched  him  gloomily  an* 
reflected  that  this  man’s  shocked  stupidity  was  another  iten 
for  which  he  would  have  to  pay.  'Besides,  I  know  yo* 

160 


i  already/  said  the  porter,  stretching  out  his  great,  thick,  rigid 
|  first  finger.  'You’re  the  only  boy  who  simply  refuses  to  give 
me  a  greeting.  Who  do  you  think  you  are  ?  Every  boy  that 
passes  the  porter’s  office  has  to  give  me  a  greeting.  With  the 
other  porters  you  can  do  as  you  like,  but  I  insist  on  manners. 
Sometimes  I  pretend  not  to  notice,  but  you  can  take  it  from 
me  that  I  know  perfectly  well  who  says  good  day  to  me  and 
who  doesn’t,  you  lout !’  And  he  turned  away  from  Karl  and 
stalked  grandly  up  to  the  Head  Waiter,  who,  however, 
instead  of  commenting  on  this  new  accusation,  sat  down  to 
finish  his  breakfast,  glancing  over  the  morning  paper  which 
an  attendant  had  just  brought  him. 

'Sir/  said  Karl,  thinking  that  at  least  he  had  better  put 
himself  right  with  the  Head  Porter  while  the  Head  Waiter 
was  ignoring  him,  since  he  realized  that  though  the  porter’s 
reproaches  could  not  do  him  any  harm,  his  enmity  could, 
'I  most  certainly  do  not  pass  you  without  a  greeting.  I 
haven’t  been  long  in  America  yet  and  I  have  just  come  from 
Europe,  where  people  are  in  the  habit  of  greeting  each  other 
excessively,  as  is  well  known.  And,  of  course,  I  haven’t  been 
quite  able  to  get  over  the  habit  yet;  why,  only  two  months 
ago  in  New  York,  where  I  happened  to  be  taken  into  good 
society,  I  was  always  being  told  that  I  was  too  profuse  in  my 
salutations.  And  now  you  say  that  I  don’t  greet  you  of  all 
people !  I  have  greeted  you  every  day  several  times  a  day. 
But,  of  course,  not  every  time  I  saw  you,  for  I  pass  you 
hundreds  of  times  daily.’ 

'You  have  to  greet  me  every  time,  every  single  time,  with¬ 
out  exception ;  you  have  to  stand  with  your  cap  in  your  hand 
all  the  time  you’re  speaking  to  me;  and  you  must  always  say 
“sir”  when  you  are  speaking  to  me,  and  not  simply  “you”* 
And  you  must  do  all  that  every  time,  every  single  time/ 

'Every  time?’  repeated  Karl  softly,  in  a  questioning  tone, 
for  he  remembered  now  that  during  the  whole  of  his  stay  in 
the  hotel  the  Head  Porter  had  seemed  to  regard  him  with  a 
severe  and  reproachful  expression,  from  the  very  first  mom- 

fit  161 


ing  when,  being  still  new  to  his  work  and  somewhat  too 
free  and  easy,  he  had  gone  up  to  the  man  without  thinking 
and  had  inquired  of  him  insistently  and  in  detail  whether  two 
men  had  not  asked  for  him  or  maybe  left  a  photograph  for 
him. 

‘Now  you  see  what  such  behaviour  brings  you  to/  said 
the  porter,  again  coming  quite  close  to  Karl  and  pointing  at 
the  Head  Waiter,  still  deep  in  his  papers,  as  if  that  gentleman 
were  the  instrument  of  his  vengeance.  ‘In  your  next  job 
you’ll  remember  to  be  polite  to  the  porter,  even  if  it’s  only 
in  some  stinking  tavern/ 

Karl  understood  now  that  he  had  really  lost  his  post,  foi 
the  Head  Waiter  had  already  told  him  so  and  here  was  the 
Head  Porter  repeating  it  as  an  accomplished  fact,  and  in  the 
case  of  a  lift-boy  there  was  probably  no  need  for  the  hote 
management  to  confirm  a  dismissal.  Yet  it  had  happenee 
with  a  rapidity  he  had  not  expected,  for  after  all  he  hae 
worked  here  for  two  months  as  well  as  he  could,  and  certainly 
better  than  many  of  the  other  boys.  But  obviously  such 
considerations  were  taken  into  account  at  the  decisive 
moment  in  no  part  of  the  world,  neither  in  Europe,  nor  irJ 
America;  the  verdict  was  determined  by  the  first  words  tha 
happened  to  fall  from  the  judge’s  lips  in  an  impulse  of  fury 
Perhaps  it  would  be  best  to  take  his  leave  at  once  and  gc 
away;  the  Manageress  and  Therese  were  probably  still  asleej 
and  he  could  say  good-bye  to  them  by  letter,  so  as  to  spar* 
them  at  least  the  disappointment  and  sorrow  which  the]* 
would  feel  if  he  said  good-bye  to  them  in  person;  he  coulc 
hastily  pack  his  box  and  quietly  steal  away.  If  he  were  t« 
stay  even  a  day  longer  —  and  he  could  certainly  have  don 
with  a  little  sleep  -  all  he  could  expect  was  the  magnifying 
of  the  incident  into  a  scandal,  reproaches  from  every  side 
the  unendurable  sight  of  Therese  and  perhaps  the  Manageress 
herself  in  tears,  and  possibly  on  top  of  all  that  some  punish 
ment  as  well.  But  it  also  confused  him  to  be  confronted  b^ 
two  enemies,  to  have  every  word  that  he  said  quibbled  at,  s 

162 


not  by  the  one  then  by  the  other,  and  misconstrued.  So  he 
remained  silent  and  for  the  time  being  enjoyed  the  quietness 
of  the  room,  for  the  Head  Waiter  was  still  reading  the  news¬ 
paper  and  the  Head  Porter  stood  at  the  table  arranging  the 
scattered  pages  of  his  list  according  to  their  numbers,  a  task 
which  he  found  very  difficult,  being  obviously  short-sighted. 

At  last  the  Head  Waiter  laid  the  newspaper  aside  with  a 
yawn,  assured  himself  with  a  glance  that  Karl  was  still  there, 
and  turned  the  indicator  of  his  table  telephone.  He  shouted: 
'Hello’  several  times,  but  nobody  answered.  ‘There’s  no 
answer,’  he  said  to  .the  Head  Porter.  The  Head  Porter  who,  it 
seemed  to  Karl,  was  following  the  telephoning  with  great 
interest,  said:  ‘It’s  a  quarter  to  six  already.  She  must  be 
awake  by  now.  Ring  harder.’  But  at  that  moment,  without 
further  summons,  the  telephone  rang  in  answer.  ‘This  is 
Isbary  speaking,’  the  Head  Waiter  began.  ‘Good  morning.  I 
hope  I  haven’t  wakened  you?  I’m  so  sorry.  Yes,  yes,  it’s  a 
quarter  to  six.  But  I’m  really  very  sorry  if  I  gave  you  a  shock. 
You  should  take  the  telephone  off  the  hook  while  you’re 
asleep.  No,  no,  there’s  really  no  excuse  for  me,  especially  as 
it’s  only  a  trivial  matter  I  want  to  discuss  with  you.  But,  of 
course,  I  have  plenty  of  time,  of  course;  I’ll  wait  and  hold 
on  if  you  want  me  to.' 

‘She  must  have  rushed  to  the  telephone  in  her  night-dress/ 
the  Head.  Waiter  said  smilingly  to  the  Head  Porter,  who  all 
the  time  had  been  bending  over  the  instrument  with  an 
intent  expression.  ‘I  must  really  have  disturbed  her,  for  she’s 
usually  wakened  by  the  girl  who  does  her  typewriting,  but 
this  morning  she  must  have  missed  doing  it  for  some  reason 
or  other.  I’m  sorry  if  I  startled  her;  she’s  nervous  enough 
as  it  is.’ 

‘Why  has  she  gone  away  from  the  telephone?’ 

To  see  what  has  happened  to  the  girl,’  replied  the  Head 
Waiter,  lifting  the  receiver  again,  for  it  had  started  to  ring. 
‘She’ll  turn  lip  all  right,’  he  went  on,  speaking  into  the  tele¬ 
phone.  ‘You  mustn’t  be  so  easily  alarmed  by  everything. 

163 


You  really  do  need  a  thorough  rest.  Well  now,  to  come  tc 
my  little  affair.  There’s  a  lift-boy  here  called'  -  he  tumec 
round  with  a  questioning  look  at  Karl  who,  listening  witl 
close  attention,  at  once  provided  his  name  -  ‘called  Kar 
Rossmann.  If  I  remember  rightly,  you  have  shown  som« 
interest  in  him;  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  he  has  ill  repaid  you: 
kindness,  he  left  his  work  without  permission  and  ha 
brought  me  into  serious  difficulties;  I  can’t  even  tell  yet  wha 
the  consequences  may  be;  and  so  I  have  just  dismissed  him 
I  hope  you  won’t  take  it  too  badly.  What  did  you  say?  Dis 
missed,  yes,  dismissed.  But  I’ve  just  told  you  that  he  desertec 
his  lift.  No,  there  I  really  cannot  agree  with  you,  my  dea 
lady.  It’s  a  matter  of  authority,  there’s  too  much  at  stake, ; 
boy  like  this  might  corrupt  the  whole  lot  of  them.  Witt 
lift-boys  particularly  you  must  be  devilish  strict.  No,  no,  ii 
this  case  I  can’t  oblige  you,  much  as  I  like  to  stand  in  you 
good  graces.  And  even  if  I  were  to  let  him  stay  in  spite  o 
everything,  simply  to  keep  my  temper  in  exercise,  it  wouldri 
be  fair  for  your  sake,  yes,  for  your  sake,  to  have  him  hero 
You  take  an  interest  in  him  which  he  doesn’t  at  all  deservei 
and  I  know  him,  and  I  know  you  too,  and  I'm  certain  tha; 
he’ll  bring  you  nothing  but  severe  disappointment  whicl 
you  must  be  saved  from  at  all  costs.  I  say  this  quite  openH 
in  the  boy’s  own  hearing  for  he’s  standing  only  a  step  away 
as  bold  as  brass.  He  is  to  be  dismissed;  no,  no,  he  is  to  b 
dismissed  once  and  for  all;  no,  no,  he’s  not  to  be  given  som 
other  kind  of  work,  I  have  no  use  for  him  at  all.  Besides 
there  are  other  people  complaining  about  him.  The  Hea 
Porter,  for  instance,  yes,  Feodor,  of  course,  yes,  Feodor  ha 
been  complaining  about  his  impoliteness  and  insolence 
What,  that  shouldn’t  be  enough?  My  dear  lady,  you  g;i 
against  your  own  character  in  supporting  this  boy.  No,  yo  1 
really  shouldn’t  press  me  like  this.’ 

At  that  moment  the  porter  bent  down  and  whispere  3 
something  into  the  Head  Waiter’s  ear.  The  Head  Waite 
first  looked  at  him  in  astonishment  and  then  spoke  so  rapidl 

164 


into  the  telephone  that  for  a  moment  Karl  could  not  quite 
make  him  out  and  came  a  little  nearer  on  tiptoe. 

'My  dear  Manageress/  he  said,  ‘to  be  quite  frank,  I 
wouldn’t  have  believed  that  you  were  such  a  bad  judge  of 
character.  I’ve  just  learned  something  about  your  angel  boy 
which  will  radically  alter  your  opinion  of  him,  and  I  almost 
feel  sorry  that  it  is  from  me  it  has  to  come  to  your  ears.  This 
fine  pet  of  yours,  this  pattern  of  all  the  virtues,  rushes  off 
to  the  town  on  every  single  free  night  he  has  and  never 
comes  back  till  morning.  Yes,  yes,  I  have  evidence  of  it, 
unimpeachable  evidence,  yes.  Now  can  you  tell  me,  perhaps, 
where  he  gets  hold  of  the  money  for  these  nocturnal  adven¬ 
tures?  Or  how  he  can  be  expected  to  attend  properly  to  his 
work?  And  do  you  want  me  to  go  the  length  of  telling  you 
what  he  does  in  the  town?  A  boy  like  that  is  to  be  got  rid  of 
as  quickly  as  possible.  And  please  let  this  be  a  warning  to 
you  how  careful  you  should  be  with  boys  who  turn  up  from 
nowhere/ 

‘But  sir/  cried  Karl,  actually  relieved  by  the  gross  mistake 
which  seemed  to  have  occurred,  for  it  might  well  bring 
about  an  unlooked-for  improvement  of  the  whole  situation, 
‘there  must  certainly  be  some  mistake.  I  understand  the 
Head  Porter  has  told  you  that  I  am  out  every  night.  But  that 
simply  isn’t  true;  I  spend  every  night  in  the  dormitory;  all 
the  other  boys  can  confirm  that.  When  I’m  not  sleeping  I 
study  commercial  correspondence;  but  I  have  never  left  the 
dormitory  a  single  night.  That’s  quite  easy  to  prove.  The 
Head  Porter  has  evidently  mistaken  me  for  someone  else,  and 
I  see  now,  too,  why  he  thinks  I  pass  him  without  a  greeting/ 

‘Will  you  hold  your  tongue?’  shouted  the  Head  Porter, 
shaking  his  fist,  where  anyone  else  would  have  shaken  his 
finger.  ‘So  I’ve  mistaken  you  for  someone  else,  have  I?  How 
could  I  go  on  being  the  Head  Porter  here  if  I  mistook  one 
person  for  another?  I  ask  you,  Mr  Isbary,  how  could  I  be 
the  Head  Porter  here  if  I 'mistook  people?  In  all  my  thirty 
years’  service  I’ve  never  mistaken  anyone  yet,  as  hundreds 

165 


of  waiters  who  have  been  here  in  my  time  could  tell  you, 
and  is  it  likely  that  I  would  make  a  beginning  with  you,  you  | 
wretched  boy?  With  that  smooth  face  of  yours  that  nobody  \ 
could  mistake?  What  have  mistakes  got  to  do  with  it,  any¬ 
way;  you  could  sneak  off  to  the  town  every  night  behind  I 
my  back,  and  it  only  needs  one  look  at  your  face  to  see  that 
you’re  a  good-for-nothing  lout/ 

Enough,  Feodor/  said  the  Head  Waiter,  whose  conversa¬ 
tion  with  the  Manageress  seemed  suddenly  to  have  broken 
off.  ‘It’s  quite  a  simple  matter.  We’re  not  particularly  con¬ 
cerned  about  how  he  spends  his  nights.  No  doubt  he  would 
like  us  to  undertake  a  full-dress  inquiry  into  his  night-life 
before  he  leaves  us.  I  can  well  imagine  that  that  would 
delight  his  heart.  Every  one  of  our  forty  lift-boys  would  have 
to  be  trotted  out,  if  he  had  his  will,  to  give  evidence;  they 
would  naturally  have  mistaken  him  for  someone  else  too, 
and  so  bit  by  bit  the  whole  staff  would  have  to  be  dragged  in 
as  witnesses;  the  hotel,  of  course,  would  stop  working 
altogether  for  a  time;  and  though  he  would  be  flung  out  in  i 
the  end  he  would  at  least  have  had  his  fun.  So  we’ll  leave ! 
that  out  of  account.  He  has  already  made  a  fool  of  the ! 
Manageress,  that  kind-hearted  woman,  and  we’ll  let  it  stop  ^ 
there.  I  won’t  listen  to  another  word;  you’re  dismissed  on  the 
spot  for  neglecting  your  duties.  I’ll  give  you  a  note  to  the ! 
cashier,  and  your  wages  will  be  paid  up  till  today.  And  let  | 
me  tell  you  that  after  the  way  you  have  behaved,  it’s  sheer ! 
charity  to  give  you  wages,  and  I'm  only  doing  it  out  of 
consideration  for  the  Manageress/ 

Another  ring  of  the  telephone  interrupted  the  Head 
Waiter  before  he  could  sign  the  note.  After  listening  to  the 
first  few  words  he  exclaimed:  ‘There’s  nothing  but  trouble  I 
from  these  lift-boys  today !  ’  Then  after  a  while  he  cried :  This  I 
is  unheard-of!’  And  turning  from  the  telephone,  he  said  toi 
the  Head  Porter:  ‘Please,  Feodor,  hold  that  boy  for  a  while;; 
we’ll  have  more  to  say  to  him  yet’  Then  he  shouted  into  the! 
telephone :  ‘Come  at  once  I.’ 

166 


Now  the  Head  Porter  could  at  last  vent  his  rage,  which 
he  had  not  succeeded  in  doing  verbally.  He  grabbed  Karl 
firmly  by  the  upper  arm,  yet  not  with  a  steady  grip  which 
could  have  been  borne;  every  now  and  then  he  loosened  his 
hold  and  then  bit  by  bit  tightened  it  so  cruelly,  for  he  was 
immensely  strong  and  the  pressure  seemed  as  if  it  would 
never  stop,  that  everything  went  dark  before  Karl’s  eyes. 
Moreover,  he  not  merely  held  Karl,  but  as  if  he  had  been 
ordered  to  stretch  him  as  well,  jerked  him  now  and  then 
almost  off  his  feet  and  shook  him,  saying  all  the  time  half 
interrogatively  to  the  Head  Waiter:  ‘Maybe  I’m  mistaking 
him  for  someone  else  now,  maybe  I’m  mistaking  him  for 
someone  else  now.’  . 

It  was  a  great  relief  for  Karl  when  the  head  lift-boy,  a  fat, 
panting  lad  called  Best,  appeared  and  distracted  the  Head 
Porter’s  attention  for  a  while.  Karl  was  so  exhausted  that 
when  to  his  astonishment  Therese  came  slipping  in  behind 
the  boy,  pale  as  death,  her  clothes  in  disorder,  her  hair  loosely 
put  up,  he  could  hardly  summon  a  smile  for  her.  In  a  moment 
she  was  beside  him  and  had  whispered :  ‘Does  the  Manageress 
know  ?  ’ 

‘The  Head  Waiter  has  told  her  over  the  telephone,’  replied 
Karl. 

‘Then  it’s  all  right,  then  it's  all  right,’  she  said  quickly, 
her  eyes  Jigh  tin  gup. 

‘No,’  said  Karl.  ‘You  don’t  know  what  they  have  against 
me.  I  must  go  away,  the  Manageress  is  already  convinced  of 
that  herself.  Please  don’t  stay  here;  go  upstairs  again;  I’ll 
come  to  say  good-bye  to  you  later.’ 

‘But,  Rossmann,  what  are  you  thinking  of?  You  can  stay 
with  us  as  long  as  you  like.  The  Head  Waiter  does  anything 
the  Manageress  asks  him;  he’s  in  love  with  her;  I  found  that 
out  a  little  time  ago.  So  don’t  worry.’ 

‘Please,  Therese,  do  go  away  now.  J  can’t  defend  myself  so 
well  if  you  are  here.  AndT  must  defend  myself  thoroughly, 
for  they’re  telling  lies  about  me.  And  the  better  I  can  pin 

167 


them  down  and  defend  myself,  the  more  chance  I  have  of 
staying  here.  So,  Therese  -’  But  then  unluckily,  in  a  sudden 
spasm  of  pain,  he  added  these  words,  though  in  a  low  tone :  ‘If 
only  the  Head  Porter  would  let  me  go  !  I  had  no  idea  he  was  j 
my  enemy.  But  he  keeps  on  crushing  and  twisting  me/  - 
*Why  did  I  say  that?’  he  thought  simultaneously.  ‘Noi 
woman  could  listen  to  it  unmoved/  and  actually,  before  he  \ 
could  prevent  her  with  his  free  arm,  Therese  had  turned  to  i 
the  Head  Porter  and  said:  ‘Please,  sir,  let  Rossmann  go  at 
once.  You’re  hurting  him.  The  Manageress  will  be  here  herself 
in  a  minute,  and  then  you’ll  see  that  this  is  all  a  mistake. 
Let  him  go;  what  pleasure  can  it  give  you  to  torture  him  !’ 
And  she  actually  tugged  at  the  Head  Porter’s  arm.  ‘Orders, 
little  girl,  orders,’  said  the  Head  Porter,  affectionately  pulling  j 
Therese  to  him  with  his  free  hand,  while  with  the  other  he 
squeezed  Karl  with  all  his  might,  as  if  he  not  merely  wished 
to  hurt  him,  but  had  some  particular  and,  so  far,  unfulfilled 
design  upon  the  arm  he  was  holding. 

It  took  Therese  some  time  to  disengage  herself  from  the 
Head  Porter’s  embrace,  and  she  was  just  about  to  make  an 
appeal  to  the  Head  Waiter,  who  was  still  listening  to  the  slow 
and  circumstantial  Best,  when  the  Manageress  hastily  ( 
entered. 

‘Thank  God  1 '  cried  Therese,  and  for  a  moment  nothing  j 
could  be  heard  in  the  room  but  that  loud  exclamation.  The  l 
Head  Waiter  jumped  up  at  once  and  pushed  Best  aside. 

‘So  you  have  come  yourself ,  my  dear  madam  ?  Because  of 
this  trifling  matter?  After  our  talk  on  the  telephone  I  half 
feared  it,  but  I  couldn’t  actually  believe  it.  And  since  then  I 
your  protege's  case  had  grown  worse  and  worse.  I’m  afraid  I 
won’t  merely  have  to  dismiss  him,  but  send  him  to  prison  as  l 
well.  Hear  for  yourself.’  And  he  gave  a  sign  to  Best. 

‘I  would  like  to  have  a  few  words  with  Rossmann  first/ 
said  the  Manageress,  sitting  down  on  a  chair  which  the  Head 
Waiter  insisted  on  setting  out  for  her. 

‘Please,  Karl,  come  nearer/  she  said.  Karl  obeyed,  or  rather1 

168 


was  dragged  nearer  by  the  Head  Porter.  ‘Let  him  go,  can’t 
you?’  said  the  Manageress  in  exasperation.  ‘He  isn’t  a  mur¬ 
derer  ! '  The  Head  Porter  actually  let  him  go,  but  before  doing 
so  crushed  his  arm  in  a  final  grip  so  violently  that  tears 
came  to  his  own  eyes  with  the  effort. 

‘Karl,’  said  the  Manageress,  folding  her  hands  calmly  in 
her  lap  and  looking  at  Karl  with  her  head  bent  -  it  was  not 
in  the  least  like  an  interrogation  -  ‘first  of  all  I  want  to  tell 
you  that  I  still  have  complete  confidence  in  you.  Also  the 
Head  Waiter  is  a  just  man;  I  can  vouch  for  that.  Both  of  us 
at  bottom  would  be  glad  to  keep  you  here’  -  here  she  glanced 
briefly  at  the  Head  Waiter,  as  if  begging  him  not  to  inter¬ 
rupt.  Nor  did  he  do  so.  ‘So  forget  everything  that  may  have 
been  said  to  you  here  till  now.  Above  all,  you  mustn’t  take 
too  seriously  anything  the  Head  Porter  may  have  said.  He’s 
an  irritable  man,  which  is  no  wonder  considering  his  work; 
but  he  has  a  wife  and  children  too,  and  he  knows  that  a  boy 
who  has  to  fend  for  himself  needs  no  extra  torments,  since 
the  rest  of  the  world  will  see  that  he  gets  his  fair  share  of 
them.’ 

It  was  quite  still  in  the  room.  The  Head  Porter  looked  at 
the  Head  Waiter  as  if  expecting  support,  the  Head  Waiter 
looked  at  the  Manageress  and  shook  his  head.  Best,  the  lift¬ 
boy,  grinned  idiotically  behind  the  Head  Waiter’s  back. 
Therese  .was  quietly  sobbing  with  grief  and  joy  and  doing 
her  best  to  keep  the  others  from  remarking  it. 

Yet,  although  it  could  only  be  construed  as  a  bad  sign, 
Karl  did  not  look  at  the  Manageress,  who-  certainly  wished 
him  to  do  so,  but  in  front  of  him  at  the  floor.  The  pain  in  his 
arm  was  still  shooting  in  all  directions,  his  shirt-sleeve  was 
sticking  to  the  bruises,  and  he  should  really  have  taken  off 
his  jacket  to  attend  to  them.  What  the  Manageress  said  was 
of-course  very  kindly  meant,  yet  it  seemed  to  him  that  simply 
because  of  the  way  in  which  she  was%acting,  the  others  must 
think  that  her  kindness  was  foolish,  that  he  had  been  enjoy¬ 
ing  her  friendship  on  false  pretences  for  two  months,  and 

169 


/ 


that  he  actually  deserved  nothing  better  than  to  fall  into 
the  Head  Porter’s  hands.  ‘I  say  this/  went  on  the  Manageress, 
4so  that  you  can  give  me  a  straight  answer,  which  it’s  likely 
you  would  have  done  in  any  case,  if  I  know  you.’ 

‘Please,  may  I  go  for  the  doctor  in  the  meantime;  the  man 
may  be  bleeding  to  death,’  the  lift-boy  Best  suddenly  put  in, 
very  politely,  but  very  disconcertingly. 

‘Go,’  the  Head  Waiter  said  to  Best,  who  at  once  rushed 
off.  And  then  to  the  Manageress :  ‘The  case  is  this.  The  Head 
Porter  wasn’t  holding  the  boy  as  a  joke.  Down  in  the  lift-boys* 
dormitory  an  utter  stranger,  completely  drunk,  was  dis¬ 
covered  carefully  tucked  up  in  one  of  the  beds.  The  boys 
naturally  wakened  him  and  tried  to  get  rid  of  him.  But  then 
the  fellow  began  to  make  a  great  row,  shouting  that  this  was 
Karl  Rossmann’s  bedroom  and  that  he  was  Rossmann’s  guest, 
that  Rossmann  had  brought  him  there,  and  would  thrash 
anyone  who  dared  to  touch  him.  Besides,  he  simply  had  to 
wait  until  Karl  Rossmann  came  back,  for  Rossmann  had 
promised  him  money  and  had  gone  to  fetch  it.  Please  note 
that,  my  dear  madam :  had  promised  him  money  and  gone 
to  fetch  it.  You  note  that  too,  Rossmann/  the  Head  Waiter 
said  over  his  shoulder  to  Karl,  who  had  just  glanced  round  at 
Therese,  who  in  turn  was  staring  at  the  Head  Waiter  as  if 
spell-bound  and  continually  pushing  a  strand  of  hair  from 
her  forehead  or  else  mechanically  lifting  her  hand  to  her 
brow  for  the  sake  of  something  to  do.  ‘Perhaps  you  need 
reminding  of  your  engagements.  For  the  man  below  also  said 
that  on  your  return  you  were  going  to  spend  the  night  with 
some  female  singer,  whose  name  nobody  could  make  out,  I 
grant  you,  since  the  fellow  always  burst  into  song  whenever 
he  came  to  it/ 

Here  the  Head  Waiter  paused,  for  the  Manageress,  grown 
visibly  paler,  rose  from  her  chair,  pushing  it  back  a  little. 

‘I’ll  spare  you  the  rest/  said  the  Head  Waiter. 

‘No,  please,  no/  said  the  Manageress,  seizing  his  arm. 
Tlease  go  on;  I  must  know  everything;  that’s  why  I’m  here.* 

170 


The  Head  Porter,  who  now  stepped  forward  and  struck 
himself  loudly  on  the  chest  to  advertise  that  he  had  seen 
through  everything  from  the  very  beginning,  was  simul¬ 
taneously  appeased  and  put  in  his  place  by  the  Head  Waiter 
with  the  words:  ‘Yes,  you  were  quite  right,  Feodor.’ 

There  isn’t  much  more  to  tell,’  went  on  the  Head  Waiter. 
The  boys,  being  what  they  are,  laughed  at  the  man  first, 
then  got  into  a  fight  with  him,  and  as  there  are  plenty  of 
good  boxers  among  them,  he  was  simply  knocked  out;  and 
I  haven’t  dared  to  ask  even  where  he  is  bleeding  and  in  how 
many  places,  for  these  boys  are  punishing  boxers  and  a  drunk 
man  is  of  course  easy  game  to  them.' 

‘I  see,’  said  the  Manageress,  laying  her  hand  on  the  arm 
of  the  chair  and  looking  down  at  the  seat  which  she  had  just 
left.  ’Please  do  say  something,  Rossmann !  ’  she  said  then. 
Therese  had  rushed  across  the  room  and  was  clinging  to  her 
mistress,  a  thing  which  Karl  had  never  seen  her  do  before. 
The  Head  Waiter  was  standing  close  behind  the  Manageress, 
slowly  smoothing  her  modest  little  lace  collar,  which  had 
slipped  somewhat  awry.  The  Head  Porter  standing  beside 
Karl  said :  ‘Speak  up !’  but  merely  used  the  words  to  cover 
the  punch  which  he  gave  him  in  the  back. 

‘It’s  true,’  said  Karl,  more  uncertainly  than  he  intended, 
because  of  the  blow,  ‘that  I  put  the  man  in  the  dormitory/ 

‘That’s  all  we  need  to  know,’  said  the  porter,  speaking  for 
everyone  present.  The  Manageress  turned  dumbly  to  the 
Head  Waiter  and  then  to  Therese. 

‘I  couldn’t  help  myself,’  Karl  went  on.  ‘The  man  is  some¬ 
one  I  used  to  know;  he  came  here  to  pay  me  a  visit  after  not 
seeing  me  for  two  months;  but  he  was  so  drunk  that  he 
couldn’t  go  away  again  by  himself.' 

The  Head  Waiter,  standing  beside  the  Manageress,  said 
softly  as  if  to  himself :  ‘So  he  came  to  pay  you  a  visit  and 
later  got  so  drunk  that  he  couldn’t  Jeave.’  The  Manageress 
whispered  something  over 'her  shoulder  to  the  Head  Waiter, 
who  seemed  to  raise  objections  but  smiled  at  her  in  a  way  that 

171 


obviously  had  nothing  to  do  with  Karl.  Therese  -  Karl  kept 
his  eyes  fixed  on  her  -  pressed  her  face  in  complete  despair 
against  the  Manageress  and  refused  to  look  at  anything.  The 
only  one  who  was  completely  satisfied  with  Karl’s  explana¬ 
tion  was  the  Head  Porter,  who  repeated  several  times :  ‘That’s 
quite  right,  you  must  stand  by  a  pal  when  he’s  drunk/  and 
tried  to  emphasize  this  explanation  by  looking  at  the  others 
and  waving  his  hands. 

‘I  am  to  blame,  therefore/  said  Karl,  and  paused  as  if  wait¬ 
ing  for  a  kind  word  from  his  judges  to  give  him  courage  for 
continuing  his  defence,  but  none  came.  ‘I  am  to  blame, 
therefore,  only  for  taking  the  man  to  the  dormitory  -  he’s 
called  Robinson  and  he’s  an  Irishman.  Everything  else  he 
said  because  he  was  drunk,  and  it  isn’t  true/ 

‘So  you  didn’t  promise  him  money?’  asked  the  Head 
Waiter. 

‘Yes/  said  Karl,  and  he  felt  sorry  at  having  forgotten  that; 
in  his  haste  and  confusion  he  had  been  too  peremptory  in 
declaring  himself  innocent.  ‘I  did  promise  him  money  because 
he  begged  me  for  it.  But  I  had  no  intention  of  fetching  it, 
but  merely  of  giving  him  the  tips  I  got  tonight.’  And  in 
proof  he  pulled  the  money  out  of  his  pocket  and  held  out 
his  hand  with  the  few  small  coins. 

Tou’re  tying  yourself  up  more  and  more/  said  the  Head 
Waiter.  ‘If  we’re  to  believe  you,  we’ve  got  to  keep  forgetting 
what  you  said  before.  First  you  only  took  the  man  to  the 
dormitory  -  and  I  don’t  even  believe  that  his  name  is  Robin¬ 
son,  for  no  Irishman  was  ever  called  that  since  Ireland  was  I 
Ireland  -  first  you  only  took  him  to  the  dormitory  -  and  for 
that  alone  you  could  be  flung  out  on  your  neck,  I  may  tell 
you  -  but  you  didn’t  promise  him  money,  yet  when  the 
question  is  sprung  on  you,  it  seems  you  did  promise  him 
money.  This  isn’t  a  game  of  question  and  answer,  let  me 
remind  you;  you’re  supposed  to  be  giving  an  explanation  of 
yourself.  And  at  first  you  had  no  intention  of  fetching  the 
money,  you  merely  meant  to  give  him  the  tips  you  got 

1JZ 


tonight,  and  now  it  turns  out  that  you  still  have  this  money 
on  you,  and  so  you  must  have  intended  to  get  some  more 
money,  a  supposition  which  is  strengthened  by  your  long 
absence.  After  all,  it  wouldn’t  be  strange  if  you  wanted  to 
get  some  money  from  your  box  for  him;  but  it  certainly  is 
strange  that  you  deny  it  so  violently,  and  that  you  keep  on 
hiding  the  fact  that  you  made  the  man  drunk  here  in  the 
hotel,  of  which  there  can  be  no  possible  doubt,  for  you  your¬ 
self  admit  that  he  came  here  by  himself  but  could  not  leave 
by  himself,  and  he  has  told  everybody  in  the  dormitory  that 
he  is  your  guest.  So  now  only  two  things  remain  in  doubt, 
which  you  can  tell  us  yourself  if  you  wish  to  save  trouble, 
but  which  can  be  perfectly  well  established  without  your 
help:  first,  how  you  managed  to  get  into  the  storerooms, 
and  second,  how- you  got  your  hands  on  enough  money  to 
giveaway?’ 

'It’s  impossible  to  defend  oneself  where  there  is  no  good¬ 
will,’  Karl  told  himself,  and  he  made  no  further  answer  to 
the  Head  Waiter,  deeply  as  that  seemed  to  afflict  Therese.  He 
knew  that  all  he  could  say  would  appear  quite  different  to 
the  others,  and  that  whether  a  good  or  a  bad  construction  was 
to  be  put  on  his  actions  depended  alone  on  the  spirit  in  which 
he  was  judged.  • 

'He  makes  no  answer,’  said  the  Manageress. 

‘It  is  the  best  thing  he  can  do,’  said  the  Head  Waiter. 

'He’ll  soon  think  out  something  else,’  said  the  Head  Porter, 
caressing  his  whiskers  with  a  hand  now  gentle,  though  lately 
so  terrible. 

'Be  quiet,’  said  the  Manageress  to  Therese,  who  had  begun 
to  sob,  standing  beside  her,  ‘you  see  that  he  has  no  answer  to 
make,  so  how  can  I  do  anything  for  him?  After  all,  it  is  I 
who  am  put  in  the  wrong  in  the  Head  Waiter’s  eyes.  Tell 
me,  Therese,  in  your  opinion  have  I  omitted  anything  I  could 
have  done  for  him?’  How  could  Therese  know  that,  and 
what  point  was  there  in  giving  away  so  much  before  these 
two  men  by  this  public  question  and  appeal  to  the  girl? 

173 


'Madam/  said  Karl,  once  more  pulling  himself  together 
for  no  other  purpose  than  simply  to  spare  Therese  the  effort 
of  answering,  ‘I  think  that  I  haven't  brought  any  discredit! 
on  you,  and  if  a  proper  investigation  were  made,  everyone] 
else  would  have  to  agree  with  me/ 

'Everyone  else/  said  the  Head  Porter,  pointing  his  finger! 
at  the  Head  Waiter,  'that's  meant  for  you,  Mr  Isbary.' 

■  'Now,  madam/  said  Mr  Isbary,  ‘it's  half-past  six,  and  it's] 
high  time  this  was  settled.  I  think  you  had  better  leave  mej 
the  last  word  in  this  matter,  which  we  have  handled  far  tool 
patiently/ 

Little  Giacomo  came  in  and  made  to  go  up  to  Karl, 
but,  daunted  by  the  general  silence,  checked  himself  and: 
waited. 

Since  the  last  words  he  had  said,  the  Manageress  had  neven 
taken  her  eyes  off  Karl,  nor  was  there  any  indication  thati 
she  had  heard  the  Head  Waiter's  remark.  Her  eyes  looked 
straight  at  Karl;  they  were  large  and  blue,  but  a  little  dimmed 
by  age  and  many  troubles.  As  she  stood  there  gently  tilting 
the  chair  before  her,  she  looked  as  if  she  would  say  nexti 
minute :  'Well,  Karl,  when  I  think  it  over,  this  business  isn'ti 
at  all  clear  yet  and  needs,  as  you  rightly  say,  a  thorough 
investigation.  And  we’ll  proceed  to  make  that  now,  whether 
anyone  agrees  or  not,  for  justice  must  be  done.' 

But  instead  of  this,  the  Manageress  said  after  a  short  pause 
which  no  one  dared  to  interrupt  -  except  that  the  clock 
struck  half-past  six  in  confirmation  of  the  Head  Waiter's^ 
words  and  with  it,  as  everyone  knew,  all  the  other  clocks  in 
the  whole  hotel;  it  rang  forebodingly  in  the  ear,  like  the 
double  beat  of  a  universal  great  impatience :  TNk),  Karl,  no, 
no !  We  won't  listen  to  any  more  of  this.  When  things  are 
right  they  look  right,  and  I  must  confess  that  your  actions 
don't.  I  am  entitled  to  say  so  and  I  am  bound  to  say  so;  I  am 
bound  to  admit  it,  for  it  was  I  who  came  here  with  every, 
prepossession  in  your  favour.  You  see  that  Therese  is  silent 
too.’  (But  she  was  not  silent,  she  was  crying.) 

174 


The  Manageress  stopped  as  if  suddenly  coming  to  a  deci¬ 
sion  and  said:  ‘Karl,  come  over  here/  and  when  he  went 
over  to  her  -  the  Head  Waiter  and  the  Head  Porter  imme¬ 
diately  began  an  animated  conversation  behind  his  back  - 
she  put  her  left  arm  round  him  and  led  him,  followed  by  the 
passive  Therese,  to  the  other  end  of  the  room,  where  she  began 
to  walk  up  and  down  with  the  two  of  them,  and  said :  ‘It’s 
possible,  Karl,  and  you  seem  to  put  faith  in  it,  otherwise  I 
really  wouldn't  know  what  to  make  of  you,  that  an  investi¬ 
gation  might  justify  you  on  separate  small  points.  Why 
shouldn’t  it?  .Maybe  you  did  give  a  greeting  to  the  Head 
Porter.  I  feel  certain  you  did,  and  I  have  my  own  opinion  of 
the  Head  Porter;  you  see  I  am  still  quite  frank  with  you. 
But  such  small  justifications  won’t  help  you  in  the  least.  The 
Head  Waiter,  whose  knowledge  of  people  I  have  learned  to 
prize  in  the  course  of  many  years,  and  who  is  the  most  trust¬ 
worthy  man  I  know,  has  clearly  pronounced  your  guilt,  and 
I  must  say  it  seems  undeniable  to  me.  Perhaps  you  merely 
acted  without  thinking,  but  perhaps  too  you  aren’t  the  boy 
I  thought  you  were.  And  yet/  with  that  she  interrupted 
herself  and  cast  a  fleeting  glance  over  her  shoulder  at  the  two 
men,  ‘I  can’t  help  still  thinking  of  you  as  a  fundamentally 
decent  lad/ 

‘Madam  !  Madam  !’  said  the  Head  Waiter,  warningly,  for 
he  had  caught  her  glance. 

‘We’ll  be  finished  in  a  minute/  said  the  Manageress,  begin¬ 
ning  to  admonish  Karl  more  hurriedly:  ‘Listen,  Karl,  from 
what  I  can  make  out  of  this  business,  I  am  actually  glad  that 
the  Head  Waiter  doesn’t  want  to  start  an  inquiry;  for  if  he 
were  to  do  it,  I  should  have  to  prevent  it  in  your  own  interest. 
No  one  must  know  how  or  where  you  got  drink  for  that  man, 
who  couldn’t  have  been  one  of  your  former  friends,  as  you 
give  out,  for  you  quarrelled  violently  with  them  when  you 
left  them,  so  that  you  wouldn’t  be  so  jriendly  with  either  of 
them  now.  Therefore  it  must  have  been  an  acquaintance  you 
just  picked  up  one  night  in  some  drinking-den  in  the  town. 


175 


How  could  you  hide  all  these  things  from  me,  Karl?  If  yo» 
really  couldn't  bear  the  dormitory  and  began  to  rake  abou 
at  night  for  an  innocent  reason  like  that,  why  did  you  neve 
say  a  word  about  it?  You  know  that  I  wanted  to  get  you  . 
room  of  your  own  and  only  gave  up  the  idea  at  your  owi 
request.  It  looks  now  as  if  you  preferred  the  general  dormitor 
because  you  felt  that  you  had  more  liberty  there.  And  yoi 
always  put  by  your  money  in  my  safe  and  brought  me  thJ 
tips  you  got  every  week;  where  in  heaven’s  name,  boy,  di« 
you  get  the  money  for  these  excursions  and  where  did  yoi 
intend  to  find  the  money  for  your  friend?  Of  course,  thes 
are  things  that  I  can’t  mention  to  the  Head  Waiter,  for  th 
moment  at  least,  or  else  perhaps  an  inquiry  might  be  un 
avoidable.  So  you  must  simply  leave  the  hotel,  and  as  soon 
possible  too.  Go  straight  to  the  Pension  Brenner  -  you’v 
been  there  several  times  with  Therese  already  -  they’ll  tak  ; 
you  in  for  nothing  if  you  show  them  this  and  she  wrote 
few  lines  on  a  card  with  a  gold  pencil  which  she  pulled  oui 
of  her  blouse,  but  without  interrupting  what  she  was  sayin  J 
-  Til-  send  your  box  after  you  at  once.  Therese,  run  up  t< 
the  lift-boys’  cloakroom  and  pack  his  box  !  ’  (But  Therese  di 4 
not  stir,  for  as  she  had  endured  all  the  grief,  she  wanted  als  { 
to  share  to  the  full  this  turn  for  the  better  which  Karl’ 
fortunes  had  taken,  thanks  to  the  kindness  of  th  i 
Manageress.) 

Someone  opened  the  door  a  little  without  showing  himsel 
and  shut  it  again  at  once.  It  must  have  been  a  reminder  M 
Giacomo,  for  he  stepped  forward  and  said :  ‘Rossmann,  I  mus 
speak  to  you/ 

‘In  a  minute/  said  the  Manageress,  sticking  the  card  ii 
Karl’s  pocket  as  he  stood  listening  with  drooping  head,  TI 
keep  your  money  for  the  time  being;  you  know  that  it’s  saf 
in  my  hands.  Stay  in  your  room  today  and  consider  you 
position;  tomorrow  -  I  have  no  time  today,  and  I’ve  beei 
kept  far  too  long  here  too  -  I’ll  come  to  the  Brenner  and  we’l 
see  what  more  can  be  done  for  you.  I  won’t  forsake  you,  yoi 

176 


must  know  that  quite  well  already.  You  needn't  worry  about 
your  future,  but  rather  about  these  last  few  weeks/  She 
patted  him  on  the  shoulder  and  then  went  over  to  the  Head 
Waiter.  Karl  raised  his  head  and  gazed  after  the  tall  stately 
woman,  as  she  walked  away  from  him  with  her  light  step 
and  easy  bearing. 

‘Well,  aren’t  you  glad/  said  Therese,  who  had  stayed  beside 
him,  ‘that  everything  has  turned  out  so  well?’ 

‘Oh  yes/  said  Karl,  and  he  smiled  at  her,  yet  could  not  see 
why  he  should  be  glad  because  he  had  been  dismissed  as  a 
thief.  Therese’s  eyes  shone  with  the  purest  joy,  as  if  it  were 
a  matter  of  complete  indifference  to  her  whether  Karl  had 
committed  a  crime  or  not,  whether  he  had  been  justly  sen¬ 
tenced  or  not,  if  he  were  only  permitted  to  escape,  in  shame 
or  in  honour.  And  it  was  Therese  who  behaved  like  this, 
Therese  who  was  so  scrupulous  in  everything  relating  to 
herself  that  she  would  turn  over  in  her  mind  and  examine 
for  weeks  any  half-doubtful  word  of  the  Manageress.  With 
deliberate  design  he  said:  ‘Will  you  pack  my  box  for  me 
and  send  it  off  at  once?’  In  spite  of  himself  he  had  to  shake 
his  head  in  astonishment,  so  quickly  did  Therese  catch  the 
implications  of  the  question,  and  in  her  conviction  that  there 
were  things  in  the  box  which  no  one  must  see,  she  did  not 
take  time  even  to  glance  at  Karl,  even  to  shake  his  hand,  but 
merely  whispered :  ‘Certainly,  Karl,  at  once,  I’ll  pack  the 
box  this  minute.’  And  she  was  gone. 

But  now  Giacomo  could  not  restrain  himself  any  longer 
and,  agitated  by  his  long  wait,  cried :  ‘Rosslnann,  the  man  is 
kicking  up  a.  row  in  the  passage  and  won’t  go  away.  They 
want  to  take  him  to  hospital,  but  he’s  objecting  and  saying 
that  you’ll  never  let  him  be  taken  to  a  hospital.  He  says  we 
must  call  a  taxi  and  drive  him  home  and  that  you’ll  pay  the 
fare.  Will  you?' 

The  man  seems  to  rely  on  you,'  said  the  Head  Waiter. 
Karl  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  counted  his  money  into 
Giacomo’s  hand.  ‘That’s  all  I  have/  he  said. 

A. — 9 


177. 


T  was  to  ask  too  if  you’re  going  in  the  taxi  with  him/ 
added  Giacomo,  jingling  the  money. 

'No,  he  isn’t  going,’  said  the  Manageress. 

Well,  Rossmann,’  said  the  Head  Waiter  quickly,  without 
even  waiting  until  Giacomo  was  out  of  the  room,  'you  are 
dismissed  here  and  now.’  The  Head  Porter  nodded  several  | 
times,  as  if  these  were  his  own  words  and  the  Head  Waiter 
merely  his  mouthpiece.  The  reasons  for  your  dismissal  I 
simply  can’t  mention  publicly,  for  in  that  case  I  would  have! 
to  send  you  to  gaol.’  The  Head  Porter  looked  very  severely  at 
the  Manageress,  for  he  knew  perfectly  well  that  she  was  the ! 
cause  of  such  excessively  mild  treatment.  'Now  go  to  Best, 
change  your  clothes,  hand  over  your  uniform  to  Best  and 
leave  the  hotel  at  once,  but  at  once.’ 

The  Manageress  closed  her  eyes,  wishing  by  this  to  reassure 
Karl.  As  he  bowed  himself  out,  he  saw  the  Head  Waiter* 
surreptitiously  seizing  her  hand  and  fondling  it.  With  heavy' 
steps  the  Head  Porter  escorted  Karl  to  the  door,  which  hei 
would  not  let  him  shut  but  held  open  with  his  own  hands  so 
as  to  shout  after  him :  'In  a  quarter  of  a  minute  you  will  pass 
my  office  and  leave  by  the  main  door.  See  to  that !’ 

Karl  made  what  haste  he  could,  so  as  to  avoid  any  molesta¬ 
tion  on  leaving,  but  everything  went  much  more  slowly  than  i 
he  wanted.  First  of  all.  Best  could  not  be  found  immediately^ 
and  at  this  time  during  the  breakfast  hour  a  great  many 
people  were  about;  then  it  appeared  that  another  boy  had 
borrowed  Karl’s  old  trousers,  and  Karl  had  to  search  the 
clothes-pegs  beside  almost  all  the  beds  before  he  found  them; 
so  that  five  minutes  at  least  had  elapsed  before  he  reached 
the  main  door,  fust  in  front  of  him  a  lady  was  walking: 
accompanied  by  four  gentlemen.  They  all  went  over  to  a  big 
car  which  was  waiting  for  them;  a  lackey  was  holding  open 
the  door  while  he  stretched  out  his  free  arm  sideways  at: 
shoulder  level,  very  stiffly,  which  looked  highly  impressive. 
But  Karl’s  hope  of  getting  away  unobserved  behind  this 
fashionable  group  was  a  vain  one.  For  the  Head  Porter  caughti 

178 


him  by  the  hand  and  dragged  him  back  between  two  of  the 
gentlemen,  with  a  word  of  excuse  to  them. 

‘Do  you  call  this  a  quarter  of  a  minute?'  he  asked,  looking 
askance  at  Karl,  as  if  he  were  examining  a  clock  that  did  not 
keep  time.  ‘Come  in  here,'  he  went  on,  propelling  him  into 
the  huge  porter’s  office,  which  Karl  had  once  been  eager 
enough  to  inspect  but  now  that  he  was  thrust  into  it  viewed 
with  suspicion.  Just  inside  the  door  he  squirmed  round  and 
tried  to  push  the  Head  Porter  away  and  escape. 

‘No,  no,  this  way  in,’  said  the  Head  Porter,  turning  him 
round  again.  . 

‘But  I’ve  been  thrown  out,'  said  Karl,  meaning  that  nobody 
in  the  hotel  had  a  right  to  give  him  orders  now. 

‘As  long  as  I  keep  hold  of  you,  you’re  not  thrown  out/ 
said  the  porter,  which  was  also  true  enough. 

Besides,  Karl  could  see  no  actual  reason  for  resisting  the 
porter.  After  all,  what  more  could  happen  to  him  now?  Also, 
the  walls  of  the  office  consisted  entirely  of  enormous  panes 
of  glass,  through  which  you  could  see  the  incoming  and 
outgoing  streams  of  guests  in  the  vestibule  as  clearly  as  if 
you  were  among  them.  Yes,  there  seemed  to  be  no  nook  or 
comer  in  the  whole  office  where  you  could  be  hidden  from 
their  eyes.  No  matter  in  how  great  a  hurry  the  people  outside 
seemed  to  be,  as  with  outstretched  arms,  bent  heads  and 
peering  eyes,  holding  their  luggage  high,  they  sought  their 
way,  hardly  one  of  them  omitted  to  cast  a  glance  into  the 
porter’s  office,  for  behind  the  panes  announcements  and  news 
were  always  hanging  which  were  intended  both  for  the 
guests  and  the  hotel  staff.  Moreover,  the  porter’s  office  and 
the  vestibule  were  in  direct  communication  with  each  other, 
for  at  two  great  sliding  windows  sat  two  under-porters  per¬ 
petually  occupied  in  giving  information  on  the  most  diverse 
subjects.  These  men  were  indeed  over-burdened,  and  Karl  had 
a  shrewd  guess  that  the  Head  Porter,  for  what  he  knew  of 
him,  had  circumvented  this  stage  in  the  course  of  his  advance¬ 
ment.  These  two  providers  of  information  -  from  outside  you 

179 


could  not  really  imagine  what  it  looked  like  -  had  always  at 
least  ten  inquiring  faces  before  them  in  the  window  opening. 
Among  these  ten,  who  were  continually  changing,  there  was  I 
often  a  perfect  babel  of  tongues,  as  if  each  were  an  emissary 
from  a  different  country.  There  were  always  several  making 
inquiries  at  the  same  time,  while  others  again  carried  on  a 
conversation  with  each  other.  The  majority  wanted  to  deposit 
something  in  the  porter’s  office  or  take  something  away,  so  i 
that  wildly  gesticulating  hands  could  also  be  seen  rising  from 
the  crowd.  Or  a  man  was  impatient  to  look  at  a  newspaper, 
which  suddenly  unfolded  in  the  air  for  a  moment  blotting 
out  all  the  faces.  All  this  the  two  under-porters  had  to  deal 
with.  Mere  talking  would  not  have  sufficed  for  their  work; 
they  gabbled,  and  one  in  particular,  a  gloomy  man  with  a 
dark  beard  almost  hiding  his  whole  face,  poured  out  informa¬ 
tion  without  even  taking  breath.  He  neither  looked  at  the 
counter,  where  he  was  perpetually  handing  things  out,  nor  at 
the  face  of  this  or  that  questioner,  but  straight  in  front  of 
him,  obviously  to  economize  and  conserve  his  strength.  His 
beard  too  must  have  somewhat  interfered  with  the  clearness 
of  his  enunciation,  and  in  the  short  time  that  he  was  standing 
there  Karl  could  make  out  very  little  of  what  was  said, 
though  possibly,  in  spite  of  the  English  intonation,  it  was  in 
some  foreign  language  which  was  required  at  the  moment. 
Additionally  confusing  was  the  fact  that  one  answer  came  i 
so  quickly  on  the  heels  of  another  as  to  be  indistinguishable  j 
from  it,  so  that  often  an  inquirer  went  on  listening  intently,  j 
in  the  belief  that  his  question  was  still  being  answered,  j 
without  noticing  for  some  time  that  his  turn  was  past.  You  I 
had  also  to  get  used  to  the  under-porter’s  habit  of  never  asking 
a  question  to  be  repeated;  even  if  it  was  vague  only  in  word¬ 
ing  and  quite  sensible  on  the  whole,  he  merely  gave  an  almost 
imperceptible  shake  of  the  head  to  indicate  that  he  did  not 
intend  to  answer  that  question  and  it  was  the  questioner’s: 
business  to  recognize  his  own  error  and  formulate  the  ques¬ 
tion  more  correctly.  This  in  particular  kept  many  people  fon 

180 


a  long  time  in  front  of  the  counter.  To  help  the  under-porters, 
each  of  them  was  allotted  a  messenger  boy,  who  had  to  rush 
to  and  fro  bringing  from  a  bookcase  and  various  cupboards 
whatever  the  under-porter  might  need.  These  were  the  best- 
paid  if  also  the  hardest  posts  that  young  boys  could  get  in 
the  hotel;  in  a  sense  these  boys  were  still  harder  put  to  it 
than  the  under-porters,  who  had  merely  to  think  and  speak, 
while  the  boys  had  to  think  and  run  about  at  the  same  time. 
If  they  ever  brought  the  wrong  thing,  the  under-porter  was 
too  pressed,  of  course,  to  give  them  a  long  lecture;  with  one 
flip  of  the  hand  he  simply  knocked  to  the  floor  whatever  they 
had  laid  on  the  counter.  Very  interesting  was  the  changing 
of  the  under-porters>  which  took  place  shortly  after  Karl 
came  in.  These  changes  had  of  course  to  happen  frequently, 
at  least  during  the  day,  for  probably  no  man  alive  could  have 
held  out  for  more  than  an  hour  at  the  counter.  At  the  relief 
hour  a  bell  rang,  and  simultaneously  there  emerged  from  a 
side  door  the  two  under-porters  whose  turn  had  now  come, 
each  followed  by  his  messenger  boy.  For  the  time  being  they 
posted  themselves  idly  by  the  window  and  contemplated  for 
a  while  the  people  outside,  so  as  to  discover  exactly  what 
questions  were  being  dealt  with.  When  the  moment  seemed 
suitable  for  intervention,  the  new-comer  would  tap  on  the 
shoulder  the  under-porter  he  was  to  relieve,  who,  although 
until  now  he  had  paid  no  attention  to  what  was  going  on 
behind  his  back,  at  once  responded  and  left  his  place.  It  all 
happened  so  quickly  that  it  often  surprised  the  people  stand¬ 
ing  outside,  and  they  almost  jumped  in  alarm  when  a  strange 
face  popped  up  before  them.  The  two  men  who  were  relieved 
stretched  themselves  and  then  poured  water  over  their  hot 
heads  at  two  wash-basins  standing  ready  for  them.  But  the 
messenger  boys  could  not  stretch  themselves  so  soon,  being 
kept  busy  for  a  little  longer  picking  up  and  returning  to  their 
places  the  various  objects  which  had  been  flung  on  the  floor 
during  their  shift. 

All  this  Karl  had  taken  in  with  the  closest  attention  in  a 

181 


few  minutes,  and  then  with  a  slight  headache  he  quietly 
followed  the  Head  Porter,  who  led  him  farther  on.  The  Head 
Porter  had  obviously  noticed  the  deep  impression  which  this 
method  of  answering  inquiries  had  made  on  Karl,  for  he 
gave  his  arm  a  sudden  jerk  and  said :  ‘You  see  that’s  the  way 
we  work  here.’  Karl  had  certainly  not  been  idle  in  the  hotel, 
but  he  had  had  no  conception  of  such  work  as  this  and  he 
looked  up,  forgetting  almost  completely  that  the  Head  Porter 
was  his  mortal  enemy,  and  nodded  with  silent  appreciation* 
But  this  again  seemed  to  the  Head  Porter  an  over-valuation 
of  the  under-porters  and  perhaps  a  piece  of  presumption; 
towards  himself,  for  he  exclaimed,  without  caring  that  every¬ 
one  heard  him,  and  quite  as  if  he  had  just  been  making  ai 
fool  of  Karl:  ‘Of  course  this  work  here  is  the  stupidest  in 
the  whole  hotel;  you  need  only  listen  for  an  hour  to  know 
pretty  well  all  the  questions  that  will  be  asked,  and  the  rest] 
you  don’t  have  to  answer  at  all.  If  you  weren’t  so  impudent] 
and  ill-mannered,  if  you  hadn’t  lied,  lazed,  boozed  and  thieved,  j 
perhaps  I  might  have  managed  to  put  you  at  one  of  these! 
windows,  since  it’s  only  a  job  for  dunderheads.’  Karl  ignored  I 
the  insult  to  himself,  so  indignant  was  he  that  the  hard  and  ! 
honourable  work  of  the  under-porters  should  be  jeered  at 
instead  of  being  recognized,  and  jeered  at  moreover  by  a  man 
who,  if  he  ever  ventured  to  sit  down  at  one  of  these  windows, 
would  certainly  cover  himself  with  ridicule  in  a  few  minutes 
and  have  to  abandon  the  job. 

‘Let  me  go,’  said  Karl,  his  curiosity  concerning  the  porter’s 
office  more  than  satiated,  ‘I  don’t  want  to  have  anything 
more  to  do  with  you.’ 

‘That’s  no  reason  for  letting  you  go,’  said  the  Head  Porter,  j 
crushing  Karl’s  arm  until  it  was  numb  and  literally  dragging 
him  to  the  other  end  of  the  office.  Couldn’t  the  people  outside 
see  this  bullying?  Or,  if  they  saw  it,  what  did  they  think  it 
meant,  since  none  of  them  objected  to  it  or  even  tapped  on 
the  glass  to  show  the  Head  Porter  that  he  was  being  watched 
and  could  not  deal  with  Karl  just  as  he  liked? 

182 


But  Karl  soon  gave  up  all  hope  of  getting  help  from  the 
vestibule,  for  the  Head  Porter  seized  a  cord,  and  over  the 
glass  panes  of  one  half  of  the  office  black  curtains  reaching 
from  the  roof  to  the  floor  were  drawn  in  a  twinkling.  In  this 
part  of  the  office,  too,  there  were  people,  but  all  working  at 
top  speed  and  .without  an  ear  or  an  eye  for  anything  uncon¬ 
nected  with  their  work.  Also  they  were  completely  dependent 
on  the  Head  Porter,  and  instead  of  helping  Karl  would  rather 
have  helped  to  conceal  anything  that  the  Head  Porter  took  it 
into  his  head  to  do.  For  instance,  there  were  six  under-porters 
attending  to  six  telephones.  Their  method  of  working  was 
obvious  at  a  glance;  out  of  each  couple  one  did  nothing  but 
note  down  conversations,  passing  on  these  notes  to  his  neigh¬ 
bour,  who  despatched  the  messages  by  another  telephone. 
The  instruments  were  of  the  new-fashioned  kind  which  do 
not  need  a  telephone  box,  for  the  ringing  of  the  bell  was  no 
louder  than  a  twitter,  and  a  mere  whisper  into  the  mouth¬ 
piece  was  electrically  amplified  until  it  reached  its  destination 
in  a  voice  of  thunder.  For  this  reason  the  three  men  who 
were  speaking  into  the  telephones  were  scarcely  audible,  and 
one  might  have  thought  they  were  muttering  to  themselves 
about  something  happening  in  the  mouthpiece,  while  the 
other  three,  as  if  deadened  by  the  thunder  coming  from  their 
ear-pieces,  although  no  one  else  could  hear  a  sound,  drooped 
their  heads  over  the  sheets  of  paper  on  which  they  had  to 
make  their  notes.  Here  too  a  boy  assistant  stood  beside  each  of 
the  three  whisperers;  these  three  boys  did  nothing  but  alter¬ 
nately  lean  their  heads  towards  their  masters  in  a  listening 
posture  and  then  hastily,  as  if  stung,  search  for  telephone 
numbers  in  huge,  yellow  books:  the  rustling  of  so  many 
massed  pages  easily  drowned  any  noise  from  the  telephones. 

Karl  simply  could  not  keep  himself  from  watching  all  this, 
although  the  Head  Porter,  who  had  sat  down,  clutched  him 
in  a  sort  of  hug. 

Tt  is  my  duty/  said  the  Head  Porter,  shaking  Karl  as  if  he 
only  wanted  to  make  him  turn  his  face  towards  him,  ‘it  is 

I  183 


my  duty,  if  the  Head  Waiter  has  left  anything  undone,  for 
whatever  reason,  to  repair  his  omission  in  the  name  of  the 
hotel  management,  as  best  I  can.  We  always  do  our  best  here 
to  help  one  another  out.  If  it  weren't  for  that,  such  a  great 
organization  would  be  unthinkable.  You  may  say  that  I'm 
not  your  immediate  superior;  well,  it's  all  the  more  to  my 
credit  if  I  attend  to  things  that  other  people  neglect.  Besides, 
as  Head  Porter  I  am  in  a  sense  placed  over  everyone,  for  I’m 
in  charge  of  all  the  doors  of  the  hotel,  this  main  door,  the 
three  noddle  and  the  ten  side  doors,  not  to  mention  innumer¬ 
able  little  doors  and  doorless  exits.  Naturally  all  the  service 
staff  who  come  in  contact  with  me  have  to  obey  me  abso¬ 
lutely.  In  return  for  this  great  honour,  of  course,  I  have 
myself  an  obligation  to  the  hotel  management  to  let  no  one 
out  of  the  hotel  who  is  in  the  slightest  degree  suspicious. 
And  you  are  just  the  person  who  strikes  my  fancy  as  being  a 
highly  suspicious  character.’  He  was  so  pleased  with  himself 
that  he  lifted  his  hands  and  brought  them  down  again  with 
a  heavy  smack  that  hurt.  It  is  possible,'  he  added,  enjoying 
himself  royally,  ‘that  you  could  have  slipped  out  of  the  hotel 
by  some  other  door;  of  course  I  shouldn’t  trouble  to  give  out 
special  instructions  on  your  account.  But  since  you're  here, 
I'm  going  to  make  the  most  of  you.  Besides,  I  never  really 
doubted  that  you  would  keep  our  rendezvous  by  the  front 
door,  for  it  is  a  general  rule  that  impudent  and  disobedient 
creatures  take  to  being  virtuous  just  when  they’re  likely  to 
suffer  from  the  consequences.  You’ll  certainly  be  able  to 
notice  that  often  enough  from  your  own  experience.' 

‘Don't  imagine,’  said  Karl,  inhaling  the  curiously  depress¬ 
ing  odour  given  out  by  the  Head  Porter,  which  he  had  not 
noticed  until  he  had  stood  so  close  to  him  for  so  long,  ‘don’t 
imagine,'  he  said,  ‘that  I  am  completely  in  your  power,  for  I 
can  scream.' 

‘And  I  can  stop  your  mouth,'  said  the  Head  Porter  as 
calmly  and  quickly  as  he  probably  would  have  done  it  in  case 
of  need.  ‘And  do  you  really  think,  if  you  brought  anyone  in, 

184 


that  you  could  find  a  single  person  who  would  take  your 
word  against  mine,  the  word  of  the  Head  Porter?  So  you  can 
see  how  foolish  your  hopes  are.  Let  me  tell  you,  when  you 
were  still  in  uniform  you  actually  looked  a  fairly  respectable 
character,  but  in  that  suit  of  yours,  which  could  only  have 
been  made  in  Europe  - ! ’  And  he  tugged  at  the  most  diverse 
parts  of  the  suit,  which,  now,  although  it  had  been  almost 
new  five  months  ago,  was  certainly  shabby,  creased,  and 
above  all  spotty,  chiefly  because  of  the  heedlessness  of  the 
lift-boys,  who  were  supposed  to  keep  the  dormitory  floor 
polished  and  free  from  dust  according  to  the  general  regula¬ 
tion,  but  in  their  laziness,  instead  of  giving  it  a  real  cleaning, 
sprinkled  the  floor  every  day  with  some  oil  or  other  and  at 
the  same  time  spattered  all  the  clothes  on  the  cloth es-stands. 
One  could  stow  one’s  clothes  where  one  liked,  there  was 
always  someone  who  could  not  lay  his  hands  on  his  own 
clothes,  but  never  failed  to  find  his  neighbour’s  hidden  gar¬ 
ments  and  promptly  borrow  them.  And  almost  invariably  it 
was  the  boy  who  had  to  clean  the  dormitory  that  day,  so 
that  one’s  clothes  were  not  only  spattered  with  oil  but 
dripping  with  it  from  head  to  foot.  Rennell  was  the  only  boy 
who  had  found  a  secret  place  to  hide  his  expensive  clothes  in; 
they  were  hardly  ever  discovered,  since  it  was  not  malice  or 
stinginess  that  prompted  the  boys  to  borrow  clothes,  but 
sheer  haste  and  carelessness;  they  simply  picked  up  garments 
wherever  they  found  them.  Yet  even  Rennell’s  suit  had  a 
round,  reddish  splash  of  oil  in  the  middle  of  the  back,  and  in 
the  town  an  expert  might  have  detected,  from  the  evidence 
of  that  splash,  that  the  stylish  young  dandy  was  a  lift-boy 
after  all. 

Remembering  these  things,  Karl  told  himself  that  he  had 
suffered  enough  as  a  lift-boy  and  yet  it  had  all  been  in  vain, 
for  his  job  had  not  proved,  as  he  had  hoped,  a  step  to  some¬ 
thing  higher,  but  had  rather  pushed  him  farther  down,  and 
even  brought  him  very  near  prison.  On  top  of  this,  he  was 
still  in  the  clutches  of  the  Head  Porter,  who  was  no  doubt 

■  ,  185 


considering  ways  and  means  of  putting  him  to  greater  shame. 
And  quite  forgetting  that  the  Head  Porter  was  the  last  man 
to  listen  to  reason,  Karl  exclaimed,  striking  his  brow  several 
times  with  the  hand  that  happened  to  be  free:  ‘Even  if  ] 
actually  did  pass  you  without  a  greeting,  how  can  a  grown 
man  be  so  vindictive  about  such  an  omission  ! ’ 

‘I  am  not  vindictive/  said  the  Head  Porter,  ‘I  only  want 
to  search  your  pockets.  I  am  convinced,  to  be  sure,  that  Ill 
find  nothing,  for  you’ve  probably  been  careful  and  slipped 
everything  to  your  friend  bit  by  bit,  a  little  every  day.  Bui 
searched  you  must  be.’  And  he  thrust  his  hand  into  one  ol 
Karl’s  coat  pockets  with  such  violence  that  the  side-stitche* 
burst.  ‘So  there’s  nothing  here/  he  said,  turning  over  in  hi* 
hand  the  contents  of  the  pocket,  a  calendar  issued  by  the 
hotel,  a  sheet  of  paper  containing  an  exercise  in  commercia 
correspondence,  a  few  coat  and  trouser  buttons,  the  ManaH 
geress’s  card,  a  nail-file  which  a  guest  had  once  tossed  to  him 
as  he  was  packing  his  trunk,  an  old  pocket  mirror  which 
Rennell  had  once  given  him  as  a  reward  for  taking  over  hi- 
work  ten  times  or  so,  and  a  few  more  trifles.  ‘So  there’?’ 
nothing  here/  said  the  Head  Porter  again,  flinging  every 
thing  under  the  bench,  as  if  that  were  the  proper  place  foj 
any  of  Karl’s  possessions  which  happened  not  to  be  stoler 
property. 

‘But  this  is  the  last  straw/  said  Karl  to  himself  -  his  fact 
must  have  been  flaming  red  -  and  as  the  Head  Porter,  ren 
dered  incautious  by  greed,  was  rummaging  in  his  seconc 
pocket,  Karl  slipped  out  of  the  sleeves  with  a  jerk,  cannoned 
into  an  under-porter  with  his  first  blind  spring,  knocking  tht 
man  violently  against  his  telephone,  ran  through  the  stuff} 
room  to  the  door,  actually  not  so  fast  as  he  had  intended 
but  fast  enough  to  get  outside  before  the  Head  Porter  in  hi 
heavy  coat  was  able  even  to  rise  up.  The  organization  of  th* 
hotel  could  not  be  so  perfect  after  all;  some  bells  were  ringing 
it  was  true,  but  heaven  only  knew  to  what  purpose  !  Member 
of  the  hotel  staff  were  careering  about  the  entrance  this  wa} 

186 


and  that,  in  such  numbers  that  one  might  almost  have 
thought  they  wanted  unobtrusively  to  make  it  impossible 
for  anyone  to  get  out,  since  it  was  hard  to  find  much  sense  in 
all  the  coming  and  going;  however,  Karl  was  soon  in  the 
open  air,  but  had  still  to  keep  along  the  front  of  the  hotel, 
for  an  unbroken  line  of  cars  was  slowly  moving  past  the 
entrance  and'he  could  not  reach  the  road.  These  cars,  in  their 
eagerness  to  get  to  their  owners  as  quickly  as  possible,  were 
actually  touching  each  other,  nosing  each  other  forward.  A 
pedestrian  here  and  there,  in  a  particular  hurry  to  cross  the 
road,  would  climb  through  the  nearest  car  as  if  it  were  a 
public  passage,  not  caring  at  all  whether  there  was  only  a 
chauffeur  in  it  and  a  couple  of  servants,  or  the  most  fashion¬ 
able  company.  But  that  kind  of  behaviour  seemed  rather 
high-handed  to  Karl,  and  he  reflected  that  one  must  be  very 
sure  of  oneself  to  venture  on  it;  he  might  easily  hit  upon  a 
car  whose  occupants  resented  it,  threw  him  out  and  raised 
a  row,  and  as  a  runaway  suspect  lift-boy  in  his  shirt-sleeves 
there  was  nothing  that  he  could  fear  more.  After  all,  the  line 
of  cars  could  not  go  on  for  ever,  and  so  long  as  he  stuck  close 
to  the  hotel  there  was  the  less  reason  to  suspect  him.  Actually 
he  reached  a  point  at  last  where  the  line  of  cars  was  not 
exactly  broken,  but  curved  away  towards  the  street  and 
loosened  out  a  little.  He  was  just  on  the  point  of  slipping 
through  into  the  traffic  of  the  street,  where  far  more 
suspicious-looking  people  than  himself  were  probably  at 
large,  when  he  heard  his  name  being  called  near  by.  He 
turned  round  and  saw  in  a  small,  low  doorway,  which  looked 
like  the  entrance  to  a  vault,  a  couple  of  lift-boys  whom  he 
knew  well,  straining  and  tugging  at  a  stretcher  on  which,  as 
he  now  perceived,  Robinson  was  actually  lying,  his  head,  face 
and  arms  swathed  in  manifold  bandages.  It  was  horrible  to 
see  him  lift  his  arms  to  his  eyes  to  wipe  away  his  tears  with 
the  bandages,  tears  of  pain  or  grief  or  perhaps  even  of  joy  at 
seeing  Karl  again. 

‘Rossmann/  he  cried  reproachfully,  'why  have  you  kept 

LI  187. 


me  waiting  so  long?  For  a  whole  hour  I've  been  struggling 
to  keep  myself  from  being  carted  away  before  you  came. 
These  fellows’  -  and  he  gave  one  of  the  lift-boys  a  clout  on 
the  head,  as  if  his  bandages  secured  him  from  retaliation  - 
'are  absolute  devils.  Ah,  Rossmann,  I’ve  had  to  pay  dearly 
for  this  visit  to  you.' 

'Why,  what  have  they  been  doing  to  you?'  said  Karl, 
stepping  over  to  the  stretcher,  which  the  lift-boys  laughingly 
set  down  so  as  to  have  a  rest. 

‘You  ask  that,'  groaned  Robinson,  'and  yet  you  can  see 
what  I  look  like.  Just  think  of  it,  they’ve  very  likely  made  me 
a  cripple  for  life.  I  have  frightful  pains  from  here  right  down 
to  here’  -  and  he  pointed  first  to  his  head  and  then  to  his 
toes  -  T  only  wish  you  had  seen  how  much  my  nose  bled.  My 
waistcoat  is  completely  ruined,  and  I  had  to  leave  it  behind 
me  too;  my  trousers  are  in  tatters,  I’m  in  my  drawers’  -  and 
he  lifted  the  blanket  a  little  and  invited  Karl  to  look  under  it. 
'What  on  earth  is  to  become  of  me?  I’ll  have  to  lie  in  bed  for 
months  at  least,  and  I  may  tell  you  at  once  there’s  nobody 
but  you  to  nurse  me;  Delamarche  is  far  too  impatient 
Rossmann,  don’t  leave  me !’  And  Robinson  stretched  out  one 
hand  towards  the  reluctant  Karl,  seeking  to  win  him  over  by 
caresses.  ‘Why  had  I  to  come  and  call  on  you !’  he  repeated 
several  times,  to  keep  Karl  from  forgetting  that  he  was  partly 
responsible  for  his  misfortunes.  Now  it  did  not  take  Karl  a 
minute  to  see  that  Robinson’s  lamentations  were  caused  not 
by  his  wounds  but  by  the  colossal  hangover  he  was  suffering 
from,  since  just  after  falling  asleep  dead-drunk  he  had  been 
wakened  up  and  to  his  surprise  violently  assaulted  until  he 
had  lost  all  sense  of  reality.  The  trivial  nature  of  his  wounds 
could  be  seen  from  the  old  rags  of  bandages  with  which  the 
lift-boys,  obviously  in  jest,  had  swathed  him  round  and 
round.  And  the  two  boys  at  either  end  of  the  stretcher  kept 
going  into  fits  of  laughter.  But  this  was  hardly  the  place  to 
bring  Robinson  to  his  senses,  for  people  were  streaming  past 
without  paying  any  attention  to  the  group  beside  the 

188 


stretcher,  often  enough  taking  a  flying  leap  clean  over  Robin¬ 
son,  while  the  taxi-driver  who  had  been  paid  with  Karl's 
money  kept  crying :  ‘Come  on  !  Come  on  ! '  The  lift-boys  put 
out  all  their  strength  and  raised  the  stretcher,  and  Robinson 
seized  Karl’s  hand,  saying  coaxingly :  ‘Come  along,  do  come/ 
Considering  the  figure  he  cut,  would  not  Karl  be  best  pro¬ 
vided  for  in  the  sheltering  darkness  of  the  taxi?  And  so  he 
settled  himself  beside  Robinson,  who  leaned  his  head  against 
him.  The  two  lift-boys  heartily  shook  hands  with  him 
through  the  window,  taking  leave  of  their  one-time  colleague, 
and  the  taxi  made  a  sharp  turn  into  the  thoroughfare.  It 
looked  as  if  an  accident  were  inevitable,  but  the  all-embracing 
stream  of  traffic  quietly  swept  into  itself  even  the  arrowy 
thrust  of  their  vehicle. 


7.  A  Refuge 


It  seemed  to  be  an  outlying  suburban  street  where  the  taxi 
stopped,  for  everything  was  quiet  and  children  were  sitting 
playing  on  the  edge  of  the  pavement.  A  man  with  a  pile  of 
old  clothes  slung  over  his  shoulder  kept  a  watchful  eye  on 
the  house-windows  above  him  as  he  cried  his  wares.  Karl  was 
so  weary  that  he  felt  out  of  place  when  he  stepped  out  of  the 
car  on  to  the  asphalt,  which  lay  warm  and  bright  in  the  I 
morning  sunshine. 

4 Is  this  really  where  you  live?'  he  called  into  the  taxi. 

Robinson,  who  had  slept  peacefully  during  the  whole 
journey,  growled  an  indistinct  affirmative  and  seemed  to  be 
waiting  for  Karl  to  carry  him  out. 

Then  you  don’t  need  me  any  more.  Good-bye,’  said  Karl, 
and  started  to  walk  away  down  the  slight  slope  of  the  street. 

Tut  Karl,  what  on  earth  are  you  thinking  of?’  cried 
Robinson,  and  his  anxiety  was  so  great  that  he  stood  up  in 
the  car  fairly  straight,  except  that  his  knees  were  somewhat 
shaky. 

Tve  got  to  go  now,’  said  Karl,  who  had  observed  Robinson’s 
speedy  recovery. 

'In  your  shirt-sleeves  ?’  asked  Robinson. 

Til  soon  earn  myself  another  jacket,’  replied  Karl,  and  he  I 
nodded  confidently  to  Robinson,  raised  his  hand  in  farewell 
and  would  have  departed  in  earnest  had  not  the  taxi-driver  I 
called  out :  ‘Just:  a  moment,  sir  !  ’ 

Unfortunately  it  appeared  that  the  man  laid  claim  to  ai 
supplementary  payment,  to  cover  the  extra  time  he  had 
waited  in  front  of  the  hotel. 


'Of  course/  cried  Robinson  from  the  car,  supporting  the 
justice  of  this  demand,  'you  kept  me  waiting  such  a  long  time 
there.  You  must  give  him  something  more/ 

'Yes,  that's  so/  said  the  taxi-driver. 

Tes,  if  I  only  had  anything  to  give/  said  Karl,  searching 
in  his  trouser  pockets  although  he  knew  that  it  was  useless. 

‘I  have  only  you  to  look  to/  said  the  taxi-driver,  planting 
himself  squarely  before  Karl.  ‘I  can't  ask  anything  from  a 
sick  man.' 

From  the  door  a  young  lad  with  a  nose  half  eaten  away 
drew  nearer  and  stood  listening  a  few  paces  away.  A  police¬ 
man  who  was  just  making  his  round  of  the  street  lowered 
his  head,  took  a  good  look  at  the  figure  in  shirt-sleeves  and 
came  to  a  stop. 

Robinson,  who  had  noticed  the  policeman,  made  the 
blunder  of  shouting  to  him  from  the  other  window  of  the 
car:  ‘It's  nothing,  it’s  nothing !'  as  if  a  policeman  could  be 
chased  away  like  a  fly.  The  children,  who  had  been  watching 
the  policeman,  saw  him  stop,  had  their  attention  drawn  to 
Karl  and  the  taxi-man  and  came  trotting  up.  In  a  doorway 
across  the  street  ah  old  woman  stood  stolidly  at  gaze. 

‘Rossmann !  ’  shouted  a  voice  from  above  them.  It  was 
Delamarche  standing  on  the  balcony  of  the  top  floor.  It  was 
difficult  to  see  him  against  the  pale  blue  sky,  but  he  was 
obviously  wearing  a  dressing-gown  and  observing  the  street 
through  a  pair  of  opera  glasses.  Beside  him  there  was  a  big 
red  sunshade,  under  which  a  woman  seemed  to  be  sitting. 
‘Hello!’  he  shouted  at  the  very  top  of  his  voice,  to  make 
himself  understood,  ‘is  Robinson  there  too?' 

‘Yes/  replied  Karl,  powerfully  supported  by  a  second,  far 
louder  ‘Yes’  from  Robinson  in  the  car.  ‘Hello !'  Delamarche 
shouted  back,  ‘I’m  coming  at  once  ! ' 

'Robinson  leaned  out  of  the  car.  ‘That's  a  man/  he  said,  and 
this  praise  of  Delamarche  was  directed  at  Karl,  at  the  driver, 
at  the  policeman  and  anyone  else  who  cared  to  hear  it.  Up  on 
the  balcony,  which  they  still  kept  watching  absently, 

191 


although  Delamarche  had  already  left  it,  from  under  the 
sunshade  there  rose  a  large  figure  which  proved  to  be  indeed 
a  woman  in  a  loose  red  gown;  she  lifted  the  opera  glasses  from 
the  ledge  of  the  balcony  and  gazed  through  them  down  at 
the  people  below,  who  began  to  turn  their  eyes  away  from 
her,  though  lingeringly.  Karl  looked  at  the  house-door  where 
Delamarche  was  to  appear,  and  then  right  through  it  into 
the  courtyard,  which  was  being  traversed  by  an  almost  un¬ 
broken  line  of  workmen,  each  of  whom  bore  on  his  shoulder 
a  small  but  obviously  very  heavy  box.  The  taxi-driver  had 
stepped  across  to  his  car  and  to  employ  the  time  was  polishing 
the  lamps  with  a  rag.  Robinson  felt  all  his  limbs,  seeming 
astonished  because  in  spite  of  the  most  intent  examination  he 
could  discover  none  but  trivial  aches,  and  then  bent  down 
and  cautiously  began  to  undo  one  of  the  thick  bandages 
round  his  leg.  The  policeman  held  his  black  baton  at  a  slant 
before  him  and  quietly  waited  with  that  deep  patience  which 
policemen  must  have,  whether  they  are  on  ordinary  duty  or 
on  the  watch.  The  lad  with  the  eaten  nose  sat  down  on  a 
doorstep  and  stretched  his  legs  before  him.  The  children 
gradually  crept  nearer  to  Karl,  for  although  he  paid  no  atten¬ 
tion  to  them,  he  seemed  the  most  important  of  all  to  them 
because  of  his  blue  shirt-sleeves. 

By  the  length  of  time  that  elapsed  before  Delamarche’s 
arrival  one  could  measure  the  great  height  of  the  house.  And 
Delamarche  came  in  great  haste,  having  stopped  merely  to 
tie  the  cord  round  his  dressing-gown.  'So  here  you  are !  ’  he 
cried,  with  both  delight  and  severity  in  his  tone.  At  each 
great  stride  he  took  his  bright-coloured  pyjamas  could  be 
seen  for  an  instant.  Karl  could  not  quite  make  out  how 
Delamarche  could  go  about  in  such  negligent  attire  here,  in 
the  town,  in  this  huge  tenement,  on  the  open  street,  as  if  he 
were  in  his  private  villa.  There  was  a  big  change  in  Dela¬ 
marche,  as  well  as  in  Robinson.  His  dark,  clean-shaven, 
scrupulously  clean  face  with  its  rough  modelling  of  muscle 
looked  proud  and  inspired  respect.  The  hard  glitter  of  his 

192 


eyes,  which  he  still  kept  half-shut,  was  startling;  his  violet- 
coloured  dressing-gown  was  certainly  old,  spotted  and  too 
big  for  him,  but  from  that  squalid  garment  there  emerged  at 
the  neck  the  folded  swathes  of  an  enormous  scarf  of  heavy 
dark  silk. 

‘Well?’  he  asked,  addressing  everybody.  The  policeman 
stepped  a  little  nearer  and  leaned  against  the  body  of  the  car. 
Karl  gave  a  brief  explanation. 

‘Robinson’s  a  bit  wobbly,  but  he  can  easily  climb  the  stairs 
if  he  tries;  the  driver  here  wants  something  extra  besides  the 
fare  I  have  already-paid  him.  And  now  I’m  going,  good  day.’ 

‘You’re  not  going,’  said  Delamarche. 

‘I’ve  told  him  that  too,’  Robinson  announced  from  the  taxi. 

‘I’m  going  all  the  same,’  said  Karl,  taking  a  few  steps.  But 
Delamarche  was  already  beside  him,  forcibly  holding  him 
back. 

‘I  say  you’re  staying  here !  ’  he  cried. 

‘Let  me  go,’  said  Karl,  and  he  made  ready  to  gain  his  free¬ 
dom  with  his  lists  if  necessary,  little  hope  as  he  had  of 
downing  a  man  like  Delamarche.  Yet  the  policeman  was 
standing  by,  and  the  taxi-driver,  and  the  street  was  not  so 
quiet  but  that  occasional  groups  of  workmen  passed  through 
it;  would  they  tolerate  it  if  Delamarche  were  to  mishandle 
him  ?  He  would  not  like  to  be  left  alone  with  him  in  a  room, 
but  why  not  here  ?  Delamarche  was  now  quietly  paying  off 
the  taxi-driver,  who  pocketed  the  unmerited  and  substantial 
addition  to  his  fare  with  many  bows  and  out  of  gratitude 
went  up  to  Robinson  and  began  to  consult  with  him  how  he 
was  best  to  be  got  out  of  the  car.  Karl  saw  that  he  was  un¬ 
observed;  perhaps  Delamarche  would  mind  it  less  if  he  just 
slipped  away;  it  was  best  to  avoid  a  quarrel  if  it  could  be 
avoided;  and  so  he  simply  stepped  on  to  the  road  as  the 
quickest  way  of  getting  clear.  The  children  rushed  over  to 
Delamarche  to  let  him  know  that  Karl  was  escaping,  but 
Delamarche  had  no  need  to  intervene,  for  the  policeman 
stretched  out  his  baton  and  said  ‘Stop  !  ’ 


193 


‘What’s  your  name?’  he  asked,  tucking  his  baton  under 
his  arm  and  slowly  bringing  out  a  notebook.  Karl  now  looked 
at  him  carefully  for  the  first  time;  he  was  a  powerfully  built 
man,  but  his  hair  was  already  almost  white. 

‘Karl  Rossmann,’  he  said. 

‘Rossmann,’  the  policeman  echoed  him,  no  doubt  simply 
because  he  was  a  quiet  and  conscientious  man,  but  Karl,  who 
was  now  having  his  first  encounter  with  the  American  police, 
saw  in  this  repetition  of  his  words  a  certain  mistrust.  And 
indeed  his  position  was  probably  precarious,  for  even  Robin¬ 
son,  though  he  was  so  occupied  with  his  own  troubles,  was  l 
making  dumb  imploring  gestures  from  the  car  to  Delamarche, , 
begging  him  to  help  Karl.  But  Delamarche  refused  him  with  i 
a  hasty  shake  of  the  head  and  looked  on  without  doing 
anything,  his  hands  in  the  huge  pockets  of  the  dressing- 
gown.  To  a  woman  who  had  just  come  out  of  the  house  the: 
lad  on  the  doorstep  explained  the  whole  situation  from  the: 
very  beginning.  The  children  stood  in  a  half-circle  behindl 
Karl  and  silently  looked  up  at  the  policeman. 

‘Show  your  identification  papers,’  said  the  policeman.  That! 
could  only  be  a  formal  question;  for  without  a  jacket  one  wasi 
not  likely  to  have  many  identification  papers  in  one’s  pockets*, 
So  Karl  remained  silent,  deciding  to  answer  the  next  question! 
fully  and  so  if  possible  to  gloss  over  his  lack  of  identification 
papers. 

But  the  next  question  was:  ‘So  you  have  no  papers?’ 
And  Karl  had  to  answer :  ‘Not  with  me.’ 

‘But  that’s  bad,’  said  the  policeman,  looking  thoughtfully 
around  him  and  tapping  with  two  fingers  on  the  cover  of  hi^. 
notebook.  ‘Have  you  an  occupation?'  he  asked  at  last. 

‘I  was  a  lift-boy,’  said  Karl. 

Tou  were  a  lift-boy,  so  you  aren’t  one  any  longer;  and  in 
that  case  what  are  you  living  on  now  ?  ’ 

‘I’m  going  to  look  out  for  another  job.’ 

‘I  see;  have  you  just  been  dismissed?’ 

‘Yes,  an  hour  ago.’ 


194 


‘Suddenly?’ 

Tes/  said  Karl,  raising  his  hand  as  in  apology.  He  could 
not  tell  the  whole  story  here,  and  even  if  that  had  been 
possible,  it  seemed  quite  hopeless  to  think  of  averting  a 
threatened  injury  by  the  recital  of  injuries  already  suffered 
And  if  he  had  not  been  able  to  get  his  rights  when  faced  by 
the  kindness  of  the  Manageress  and  the  insight  of  the  Head 
Waiter,  he  certainly  could  not  expect  to  get  them  from  the 
company  gathered  here  in  the  street. 

‘And  you  were  dismissed  without  your  jacket?’  asked  the 
policeman. 

‘Why,  yes/  said  Karl;  so  in  America  too  it  was  the  habit 
of  authorities  to  ask  questions  about  what  they  could  see  for 
themselves.  (How  exasperated  his  father  had  been  over  the 
pointless  inquiries  of  the  officials  when  he  was  getting  Karl’s 
passport!)  Karl  felt  like  running  and  hiding  himself  some¬ 
where,  if  only  to  escape  answering  any  more  questions.  And 
now  the  policeman  put  the  very  question  which  he  feared 
most  of  all  and  which  he  had  been  so  uneasily  expecting  that 
very  likely  he  had  behaved  with  less  prudence  than  he  might 
have  done. 

‘In  what  hotel  were  you  employed?’ 

Karl  sank  his  head  and  did  not  reply;  that  was  the  last 
question  he  was  prepared  to  answer.  It  simply  must  not 
happen  for  him  to  be  escorted  by  a  policeman  to  the  Hotel 
Occidental  again,  to  start  investigations  there  into  which 
his  friends  and  enemies  would  all  be  drawn,  to  have  the 
Manageress’s  wavering  faith  in  him  completely  undermined, 
should  the  boy  whom  she  thought  was  in  the  Pension  Bren¬ 
ner  turn  up  in  the  custody  of  a  policeman,  in  his  shirt-sleeves, 
without  the  card  she  had  given  him;  while  the  Head  Waiter 
i  would  probably  nod  comprehendingly  and  the  Head  Porter 
mention  the  Hand  of  God  which  had  at  last  caught  the 
evil-doer. 

‘He  was  employed  in  the  Hotel  Occidental/  said  Dela- 
marche,  stepping  over  to  the  policeman. 


195 


'No/  shouted  Karl,  stamping  his  foot,  'that  isn't  true!  I 
Delamarche  surveyed  him  with  his  lips  pursed  in  mockery 
as  if  there  were  many  things  he  could  divulge.  Among  th« 
children  Karl  s  unexpected  agitation  produced  great  excite 
ment,  and  they  lined  up  beside  Delamarche  to  get  a  bette: 
look  at  Karl.  Robinson  had  stuck  his  head  completely  out  o 
the  car;  he  was  so  intent  that  he  did  not  move  except  for  ar: 
occasional  flicker  of  the  eyelids.  The  boy  on  the  doorstej 
clapped  his  hands  with  delight;  the  woman  beside  him  gav< 
him  a  nudge  with  her  elbow  to  keep  him  quiet.  The  porters  ir 
the  courtyard  had  just  stopped  for  breakfast  and  appeared  ii 
a  bunch  with  great  cans  of  black  coffee,  which  they  kep 
stirring  with  long  rolls  of  bread.  Several  sat  down  on  the  edg^ 
of  the  pavement,  and  they  all  gulped  down  their  coffee  ver 
loudly. 

'You  know  this  lad?'  the  policeman  asked  Delamarche. 

'Better  than  I  have  a  mind  to,'  said  Delamarche.  'I  hav 
done  him  much  kindness  in  my  time,  and  he  gave  me  litd{ 
thanks  for  it,  as  you  can  probably  imagine,  even  after  thi 
short  encounter  you've  had  with  him/ 

'Yes/  said  the  policeman,  'he  seems  to  be  a  hardened  yourn 
rascal/ 

'He  is  all  that/  said  Delamarche,  'but  even  that  isn't  thi 
worst  thing  about  him.' 

'Is  that  so?'  said  the  policeman. 

'Oh/  said  Delamarche,  who  was  now  warming  to  hi  I 
theme  and  swinging  his  dressing-gown  to  and  fro  with  hi 
hands  in  the  pockets,  ‘he's  a  fine  bird,  this  fellow.  I  and  nr 
friend  there  in  the  car  once  picked  him  up  when  he  wa 
down  and  out,  he  had  no  idea  at  that  time  of  American  con 
ditions,  he  had  just  come  from  Europe,  where  they  had  n«i 
use  for  him  either;  well,  we  took  him  with  us,  let  him  liv 
with  us,  explained  things  to  him  and  tried  to  get  him  a  job 
thinking  in  spite  of  everything  that  we’d  make  a  decen 
human  being  out  of  him,  and  in  the  end  he  did  the  disappear 
ing  trick  one  night,  simply  vanished,  and  in  circumstance 

196 


I’d  rather  not  mention  now.  Is  that  true  or  not? 
asked  Delamarche  in  conclusion,  plucking  at  Karls  shirt¬ 
sleeve. 

‘Back  there,  you  children  !  ’  shouted  the  policeman,  for  the 
children  had  pressed  forward  so  far  that  Delamarche  had 
almost  stumbled  over  one  of  them.  Meanwhile  the  porters, 
discovering  that  this  cross-examination  was  more  interesting 
than  they  had  suspected,  began  to  pay  some  heed  to  it  and 
gathered  in  a  close  ring  behind  Karl,  so  that  he  could  not 
retreat  even  by  a  step  and  had  to  suffer,  too,  at  his  very  ear 
the  incessant .  chatter  of  these  same  portefs,  who  babbled 
rather  than  spoke  in  a  quite  incomprehensible  jargon  which 
was  perhaps  broken  English  interspersed  with  Slavonic 
words. 

Thanks  for  the  information/  said  the  policeman,  saluting 
Delamarche.  ‘In  any  case  I’ll  take  him  with  me  and  hand  him 
back  to  the  Hotel  Occidental/ 

But  Delamarche  said :  ‘May  I  ask  you  as  a  favour  to  leave 
the  boy  with  me  for  the  time  being;  I  have  some  business  to 
settle  with  him.  I  promise  you  that  I’ll  personally  take  him 
back  to  the  hotel  afterwards/ 

‘I  can’t  do  that/  said  the  policeman. 

Delamarche  said :  ‘Here  is  my  card/  and  handed  him  the 
card. 

The  policeman  looked  at  it  respectfully,  but  said  with  a 
polite  smile :  ‘No,  it  can’t  be  done/ 

Much  as  Karl  had  been  on  his  guard  against  Delamarche 
hitherto,  he  saw  in  him  now  his  only  possible  salvation.  The 
way  he  was  haggling  with  the  policeman  was  certainly  sus¬ 
picious,  but  in  any  case  Delamarche  would  be  more  easily 
induced  than  the  policeman  not  to  deliver  him  to  the  hotel. 
And  even  if  he  were  brought  back  to  the  hotel  by  Dela¬ 
marche,  it  would  not  be  nearly  so  bad  as  to  be  escorted  there 
by  a  policeman.  For  the  moment,  of  fourse,  he  must  not  let 
it  be  seen  that  he  really  wanted  to  stay  with  Delamarche,  or 
all  was  lost.  And  with  an  uneasy  feeling  he  watched  the 

197 


policeman's  hand,  which  might  rise  at  any  moment  to  seize  I 
him. 

'I  must  at  least  find  out  why  he  was  suddenly  dismissed/ 
said  the  policeman  at  last,  while  Delamarche  looked  away 
with  an  offended  air  and  twisted  the  card  between  his, 
finger-tips. 

'But  he  isn't  dismissed  at  all !'  cried  Robinson  to  everyone's 
surprise,  leaning  out  of  the  taxi  as  far  as  he  could  reach,  with  i 
one  hand  on  the  driver’s  shoulder.  Tar  from  it;  he  has  a  very; 
good  job  there.  He's  the  head  boy  in  the  dormitory  and  canj 
take  anyone  in  there  that  he  likes.  Only  he’s  terribly  busy, 
and  if  you  want  to  ask  him  for  anything  you  have  to  waid 
for  a  long  time.  He’s  always  in  conference  with  the  Hea# 
Waiter  and  the  Manageress;  his  post  is  a  confidential  one. 
He’s  certainly  not  dismissed.  I  don’t  know  why  he  said  he 
was.  How  can  he  be  dismissed?  I  got  badly  hurt  in  the  hotel, 
and  he  had  instructions  to  take  me  home,  and  since  he  wasn’t! 
wearing  his  jacket  at  the  time  he  just  came  without  it.  1 
couldn’t  wait  until  he  fetched  his  jacket.’ 

'Well  now/  said  Delamarche,  spreading  out  his  arms,  in  a 
tone  which  reproached  the  policeman  for  his  lack  of  discern-! 
ment;  and  these  two  words  of  his  seemed  to  bring  an  incomi 
testable  clarity  into  the  vagueness  of  Robinson’s  statement! 

'But  is  this  true?’  asked  the  policeman,  already  weakening ; 
‘And  if  it  is  true,  why  does  the  boy  give  out  that  he  W 
dismissed?’ 

'You’d  better  tell  him,'  said  Delamarche. 

Karl  looked  at  the  policeman  whose  task  it  was  to  keep] 
order  here  among  strangers  thinking  only  of  their  own 
advantage,  and  he  had  some  intuition  of  the  man’s  difficulties) 
That  made  him  unwilling  to  tell  a  he,  so  he  kept  his  hand: 
tightly  clasped  behind  his  back. 

In  the  house-door  an  overseer  appeared  and  clapped  hii 
hands  as  a  signal  that  the  porters  should  go  back  to  work 
again.  They  shook  the  grounds  out  of  their  coffee  cans  and 
falling  silent,  drifted  reluctantly  through  the  doorway. 

198 


"We’ll  never  come  to  a  conclusion  this  way/  said  the 
policeman,  and  he  made  to  seize  Karl  by  the  arm.  Karl  in¬ 
voluntarily  recoiled  a  little,  became  conscious  of  the  free 
space  at  his  back  which  the  porters’  departure  had  left  open, 
turned  about  and  with  a  few  great  bounds  for  a  start  set  off 
at  full  speed.  The  children  let  out  a  single  yell  and  with 
outstretched  arms  ran  a  few  steps  along  with  him. 

"Stop  him  !  ’  the  policeman  shouted  down  the  long,  almost 
empty  street,  and  shouting  this  cry  at  regular  intervals  set 
out  after  Karl  at  an  easy  run  which  showed  both  great 
strength  and  practice.  It  was  lucky  for  Karl  that  the  chase 
took  place  in  a  working-class  quarter.  The  workers  had  no 
liking  for  the  authorities.  Karl  stuck  to  the  middle  of  the 
road  because  there  were  fewer  obstacles  there,  and  he  saw 
occasional  workers  calmly  halting  on  the  pavement  to  watch 
him  while  the  policeman  shouted  "Stop  him!’  and  kept 
pointing  his  baton  at  him  as  he  ran  a  parallel  course,  keeping 
shrewdly  to  the  smooth  pavement.  Karl  had  very  little  hope 
and  almost  lost  that  altogether  when  the  policeman,  as  they 
were  nearing  some  cross-streets  where  there  were  sure  to  be 
police  patrols,  began  to  blow  really  deafening  blasts  on  his 
whistle.  Karl’s  only  advantage  was  his  light  attire;  he  flew, 
or  rather  plunged,  down  the  street,  which  sloped  more  and 
more  steeply;  but  confused  by  his  lack  of  sleep  he  often  made 
useless  bounds,  too  high  in  the  air  and  a  vain  waste  of 
precious  time.  Besides,  the  policeman  had  his  objective  before 
his  eyes  and  had  no  time  to  think,  whereas  Karl  had  to  think 
first  and  attend  to  his  running  only  in  the  intervals  between 
weighing  possibilities  and  making  decisions.  His  plan,  a 
somewhat  desperate  one,  was  to  avoid  the  cross-streets  for  the 
time  being,  since  he  did  not  know  what  they  concealed, 
perhaps  for  instance  he  might  run  straight  into  a  police 
station;  he  wanted  as  long  as  possible  to  keep  to  this  main 
thoroughfare  which  he  could  survey  jrom  end  to  end,  since 
it  did  not  terminate  until'far  below,  in  a  bridge  vanishing 
suddenly  into  a  haze  of  mist  and  sunshine  in  mid-air.  Acting 

199 


on  this  decision,  he  was  just  putting  on  a  faster  spurt  so  as  tc 
pass  the  first  cross-street  in  a  flash,  when  he  saw  not  very  fa . 
in  front  of  him  a  policeman  lurking  watchfully  by  the  dark 
wall  of  a  house  in  shadow,  ready  to  spring  out  on  him  at  tht 
right  moment.  There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  turn  into  tht 
cross-street,  and  when  from  that  very  street  someone  gently 
called  him  by  name  -  he  thought  it  was  a  delusion  at  first) 
for  there  had  been  a  ringing  in  his  ears  all  the  time  -  ht 
hesitated  no  longer  and  made  an  abrupt  turn,  to  take  tin 
police  as  much  as  possible  by  surprise,  swinging  round  at : 
right-angle  on  one  foot  into  the  cross-street. 

He  had  taken  only  two  strides  -  he  had  already  forgotten 
that  someone  had  called  his  name,  for  the  second  policeman 
was  now  blowing  his  whistle  too,  obviously  fresh  and  un 
winded,  and  distant  pedestrians  ahead  of  him  in  the  crossi 
street  seemed  to  be  quickening  their  steps  —  when  an  am 
darting  out  from  a  little  doorway  seized  him  and  he  wa 
drawn  into  a  dark  entry,  while  a  voice  said:  ‘Don't  move  I 
It  was  Delamarche,  quite  out  of  breath,  his  face  flushed,  hi  i 
hair  sticking  damply  to  his  head.  He  was  clad  only  in  hi  i 
shirt  and  drawers,  his  dressing-gown  tucked  under  his  arm 
The  door,  which  was  not  a  main  door  but  only  an  incon 
spicuous  side  door,  he  shut  and  locked  at  once. 

‘Wait  a  minute/  he  said,  leaning  against  the  wall  an^ 
breathing  heavily  with  his  head  thrown  back.  Karl,  almosi 
lyinej  in  his  arms  and  hardly  knowing  what  he  was  doint 
pressed  his  face  against  his  breast. 

‘There  they  go/  said  Delamarche,  listening  intently  anj 
pointing  with  his  finger  at  the  door.  The  two  policemen 
were  really  running  past,  their  feet  ringing  in  the  emptl 
street  like  the  striking  of  steel  against  stone. 

‘You've  been  fairly  put  through  it/  said  Delamarche  M 
Karl,  who  was  still  panting  for  breath  and  could  not  brin 
out  a  word.  Delamarche  laid  him  cautiously  on  the  floo^ 
knelt  down  beside  him,  passed  a  hand  several  times  over  h: 
brow  and  regarded  him. 


200 


I’m  all  right  now/  said  Karl,  painfully  getting  up. 

Then  let’s  go/  said  Delamarche,  who  had  put  on  his 
dressing-gown  again,  and  he  pushed  Karl,  whose  head  still 
drooped  with  weariness,  before  him,  giving  him  an  occasional 
shake  to  liven  him  up. 

Tou  say  you’re  tired?’  he  said.  Tou  had  the  whole  street 
to  career  about  in  like  a  horse,  but  I  had  to  double  through 
these  accursed  passages  and  courtyards.  It’s  a  good  thing  that 
I’m  a  bit  of  a  runner  too.’  In  his  pride  he  gave  Karl  a  mighty 
thump  on  the  back.  ‘A  race  with  the  police  like  this  now 
and  then  is  good  practice/ 

‘I  was  dog-tired  before  I  began  running/  said  Karl. 

There’s  no  excuse  for  bad  running/  said  Delamarche.  'If 
it  hadn’t  been  for  me  they  would  have  nabbed  you  long  since/ 

‘I  think  so  too/  said  Karl.  Tm  much  obliged  to  you/ 

'No  doubt  of  that/  said  Delamarche. 

They  went  through  a  long  narrow  ground-floor  lobby 
which  was  paved  with  dark,  smooth  flagstones.  Here  and 
there  to  right  and  left  a  staircase  opened  out,  or  a  passage 
giving  on  a  more  spacious  hall-way.  Scarcely  any  grown 
people  were  to  be  seen,  but  children  were  playing  on  the 
empty  stairs.  Beside  a  stair-railing  a  little  girl  was  standing 
weeping  so  hard  that  her  whole  face  glistened  with  tears.  As 
soon  as  she  caught  sight  of  Delamarche  she  rushed  up  the 
stairs,  gasping  for  air,  her  mouth  wide  open,  and  was  not 
reassured  until  she  was  quite  high  up,  after  looking  over  her 
shoulder  time  and  again  to  make  certain  that  no  one  was 
chasing  her  or  likely  to  chase  her. 

T  ran  her  down  a  minute  ago’  said  Delamarche  laughing, 
and  he  flourished  his  fist  at  her,  whereupon  she  rushed  up 
still  farther,  screaming. 

The  courtyards  they  threaded  were  also  almost  completely 
forsaken.  An  occasional  porter  pushed  a  two-wheeled  hand- 
barrow  before  him,  a  woman  was^  filling  a  bucket  with 
water  at  a  pump,  a  postman  was  quietly  making  his  round, 
an  old  man  with  a  white  moustache  sat  before  a  glass  door 


smoking  a  pipe  with  his  legs  crossed,  crates  were  being 
unloaded  before  a  dispatch  agency  while  the  idle  horses 
imperturbably  turned  their  heads  from  side  to  side  and  ai 
man  in  overalls  supervised  the  proceedings  with  a  paper  in 
his  hand;  behind  the  open  window  of  an  office  a  clerk, 
sitting  at  his  desk,  raised  his  head  and  looked  thoughtfully, 
out  just  as  Karl  and  Delamarche  went  past. 

This  is  as  quiet  a  place  as  you  could  wish  for/  said 
Delamarche.  ‘In  the  evening  it’s  pretty  noisy  for  an  hour  on 
two,  but  all  day  long  it’s  ideal.’  Karl  nodded;  it  seemed  a  good 
deal  too  quiet  for  him.  ‘I  couldn’t  live  anywhere  else,'  said; 
Delamarche,  ‘for  Brunelda  simply  can’t  stand  any  noise.  Dc 
you  know  Brunelda?  Well,  you’ll  soon  see  her.  Take  my, 
advice  anyhow,  and  keep  as  quiet  as  you  can/ 

When  they  reached  the  stairway  which  led  up  to  Dela 
marche’s  flat,  the  taxi  had  already  gone  and  the  boy  with  the 
half-eaten  nose  announced,  without  showing  any  surprise  ai 
Karl’s  reappearance,  that  he  had  lugged  Robinson  upstairs  3 
Delamarche  only  nodded  to  him,  as  if  he  were  a  servant  whc^ 
had  merely  done  his  duty,  and  then  drew  Karl,  who  hesitated 
a  moment  and  gazed  out  at  the  sunny  street,  up  the  stair?; 
with  him.  ‘We’ll  soon  be  there/  said  Delamarche  several 
times  during  the  ascent,  but  his  prophecy  was  tardy  in 
fulfilling  itself,  for  there  was  always  another  stair  ahead  o 
them,  with  a  barely  perceptible  change  in  direction.  Once 
Karl  actually  had  to  stop,  not  from  weariness  but  from  help 
lessness  in  face  of  such  a  length  of  stairs.  ‘The  flat’s  very 
high  up/  said  Delamarche,  as  they  went  on,  ‘but  that  has  it; 
advantages  too.  We’re  not  tempted  to  go  out  much,  we  loung* 
about  in  our  dressing-gowns  all  day,  it’s  very  comfortable 
Of  course,  no  visitors  ever  come  up  so  far  either/ 

‘And  what  visitors  could  they  have?’  thought  Karl. 

At  last  on  a  landing  they  caught  sight  of  Robinson  outside 
a  closed  door,  and  now  they  had  arrived;  the  stairs  were  no 
at  an  end  yet,  but  went  on  farther  in  the  semi-darknes- 
without  any  indication  that  an  end  was  even  in  sight. 


202 


T  thought  so !  ’  said  Robinson  in  a  muted  voice  as  if  he 
were  still  suffering  pain,  ‘Delamarche  has  brought  him ! 
Rossmann,  where  would  you  be  without  Delamarche!’ 
Robinson  was  standing  in  his  underclothes,  scantily  wrapped 
in  the  small  blanket  he  had  been  given  at  the  Hotel  Occi¬ 
dental;  there  was  no  visible  reason  why  he  did  not  go  into 
the  flat  instead  of  standing  here  as  a  laughing-stock  for  any 
chance  passer-by. 

‘Is  she  asleep  ?  ’  asked  Delamarche. 

‘I  don’t  think  so,’  said  Robinson,  ‘but  I  thought  it  better  to 
wait  till  you  came.' 

‘We  must  see  first  whether  she’s  sleeping,’  said  Delamarche, 
bending  down  to  the  keyhole.  After  he  had  peered  through 
it  a  long  time,  turning  his  head  this  way  and  that,  he  got 
up  and  said :  ‘I  can’t  see  her  clearly;  the  curtain’s  drawn. 
She’s  sitting  on  the  couch  but  she  may  be  asleep.’ 

‘Why,  is  she  ill  ?  ’  asked  Karl,  for  Delamarche  was  standing 
there  as  if  at  a  loss  for  advice. 

But  he  retorted  in  a  sharp  enough  voice :  ‘Ill?’ 

‘He  doesn’t  know  her,’  said  Robinson,  in  extenuation. 

A  few  doors  farther  on  two  women  stepped  out  into  the 
passage;  they  wiped  their  hands  on  their  aprons,  eyeing 
Delamarche  and  Robinson,  and  seemed  to  be  talking  about 
them.  A  young  girl  with  gleaming  fair  hair  bounded  out  of 
a  door  and  squeezed  between  the  two  women,  hanging  on  to 
their  arms. 

‘These  are  disgusting  women,’  said  Delamarche,  lowering 
his  voice,  it  was  evident,  only  out  of  consideration  for  the 
slumbering  Brunelda,  ‘sooner  or  later  I’ll  report  them  to  the 
police  and  then  I’ll  be  rid  of  them  for  years.  Don’t  look  their 
way,’  he  snapped  at  Karl.  But  Karl  had  not  seen  any  harm  in 
looking  at  the  women,  since  in  any  case  he  had  to  stand  in 
the  passage  waiting  for  Brunelda  to  waken.  And  he  shook 
his  head  angrily,  as  if  he  refused  to  take  any  admonitions 
from  Delamarche,  and  he'  had  just  begun  walking  towards 
the  women  to  make  his  meaning  clearer,  when  Robinson 

203 


caught  him  by  the  sleeve  with  the  words:  ‘Rossmann,  takej 
care  !’  while  Delamarche,  already  exasperated,  was  roused  to  I 
such  fury  by  a  loud  burst  of  laughter  from  the  girl  that 
whirling  his  arms  and  legs  he  made  a  great  spring  at  the  s 
women,  who  vanished  into  their  doors  as  if  they  had  beeni 
blown  away.  That’s  how  I  have  often  to  clear  the  passages/ 
remarked  Delamarche,  strolling  back  again;  then  he  remem- - 
bered  that  Karl  had  been  refractory  and  said:  ‘But  I  expect  I 
very  different  behaviour  from  you,  or  else  you’re  likely  to 
come  up  against  me/ 

Then  from  the  room  a  gentle  voice  queried  in  a  tired  tone: ; 
Ts  that  Delamarche?’ 

Tes/  answered  Delamarche,  looking  tenderly  at  the  door,, 
‘may  we  come  in?’ 

‘Oh  yes/  was  the  answer,  and  after  casting  one  more 
glance  at  the  two  standing  behind  him,  Delamarche  slowly 
opened  the  door. 

They  stepped  into  complete  darkness.  The  curtain  before: 
the  balcony  door  -  there  was  no  window  -  was  completely 
drawn  and  let  very  little  light  through;  but  the  fact  that  the 
room  was  crammed  with  furniture  and  clothes  hanging 
everywhere  contributed  greatly  to  make  it  darker.  The  airi 
was  musty  and  one  could  literally  smell  the  dust  which  had 
gathered  here  in  corners  apparently  beyond  the  reach  of  any. 
hand.  The  first  things  that  Karl  noticed  on  entering  were 
three  trunks,  set  just  behind  one  another. 

On  the  couch  was  lying  the  woman  who  had  been  looking, 
down  earlier  from  the  balcony.  The  red  gown  had  got 
rumpled  a  little  beneath  her  and  hung  in  a  great  peak  to  the: 
floor;  her  legs  could  be  seen  almost  as  far  as  the  knee;  she  wa^i 
wearing  thick  white  woollen  stockings;  she  had  no  shoes. 

‘How  hot  it  is,  Delamarche,’  she  said,  turning  her  facci 
from  the  wall  and  languidly  extending  her  hand  in  the< 
direction  of  Delamarche,  who  seized  it  and  kissed  it.  Kar 
could  see  only  her  double  chin,  which  rolled  in  sympathy 
with  the  turning  of  her  head. 

204 


Would  you  like  me  to  open  the  curtain?'  asked 
Delamarche. 

‘Oh,  not  that,'  she  said  as  if  in  despair,  shutting  her  eyes, 
‘that  would  only  make  it  worse/ 

Karl  had  gone  up  to  the  foot  of  the  couch  so  as  to  see  the 
woman  better;  he  was  surprised  at  her  lamentations,  for  the 
heat  was  nothing  out  of  the  common. 

Wait,  I'll  make  you  a  little  more  comfortable,'  said 
Delamarche  anxiously,  and  he  undid  a  few  buttons  at  her 
neck  and  pulled  her  dress  open  at  the  throat  so  that  part  of 
her  breast  was  laid  bare  and  the  soft,  yellowish  lace  border 
of  her  chemise  appeared. 

‘Who  is  that,'  said  the  woman  suddenly,  pointing  a  finger 
at  Karl,  ‘why  does  he  stare  at  me  so  hard  ? ' 

Tou’re  being  a  great  help,  aren’t  you?’  said  Delamarche, 
pushing  Karl  aside,  while  he  reassured  the  woman  with  the 
words:  ‘It’s  only  the  boy  I’ve  brought  with  me  to  attend 
on  you.’ 

‘But  I  don’t  want  anyone !  ’  she  cried.  Why  do  you  bring 
strange  people  into  the  house?' 

'But  you’ve  always  been  asking  for  someone  to  attend  to 
you,’  said  Delamarche,  kneeling  down  on  the  floor,  for  there 
was  no  room  whatever  on  the  couch  beside  Brunelda,  in  spite 
of  its  great  breadth. 

‘Ah,  Delamarche,'  she  said,  ‘you  don’t  understand  me,  you 
don’t  understand  me  at  all.’ 

‘Then,  all  right,  I  don’t  understand  you,'  said  Delamarche, 
taking  her  face  between  his  hands.  ‘But  it  doesn’t  really 
matter;  he  can  go  at  once,  if  you  like.' 

‘Since  he  is  here,  he  can  stay,’  she  said  now,  and  tired  as 
he  was,  Karl  felt  so  grateful  for  these  words,  though  they 
probably  were  not  kindly  meant,  that  still  vaguely  thinking 
of-  those  endless  stairs  which  he  might  have  had  to  descend 
again,  he  stepped  over  Robinson,  %now  peacefully  asleep 
on  his  blanket,  and  said;  in  spite  of  Delamarche’s  angry 
gesticulations: 


205 


*1  thank  you  anyway,  for  letting  me  stay  here  a  little  longer. 
I  ve  had  no  sleep  for  twenty-four  hours  and  I’ve  done  a  lot 
of  things  and  been  rather  upset.  I’m  terribly  tired.  I  hardly 
know  where  I  am.  But  after  I  have  slept  an  hour  or  two  you 
can  pack  me  off  straight  away  and  I'll  go  gladly.' 

‘You  can  stay  here  as  long  as  you  like,'  said  the  woman, 
adding  ironically :  'We  have  more  than  room  enough  here,  as 
you  see.' 

Then,  you’d  better  go,'  said  Delamarche,  ‘we  haven’t  any 
use  for  you.' 

‘No,  let  him  stay,'  said  the  woman,  this  time  in  earnest. 

And  Delamarche  said  to  Karl  as  if  in  obedience  to  her 
words :  ‘Well  then,  go  and  lie  down  somewhere.' 

‘He  can  he  down  on  the  curtains,  but  he  must  take  off 
his  shoes,  to  keep  from  tearing  them.' 

Delamarche  showed  Karl  the  place  she  meant.  Between 
the  door  and  the  three  trunks  a  great  pile  of  the  most  multi¬ 
farious  window  curtains  had  been  flung.  Had  they  all  been 
methodically  folded,  with  the  heavy  ones  below  and  the  light 
ones  on  top,  and  had  the  curtain  rods  and  wooden  rings 
scattered  through  the  pile  been  taken  out,  they  might  have 
made  a  tolerable  couch,  but  as  it  was  they  made  merely  a 
tottering,  unstable  heap  on  which,  however,  Karl  lay  down 
at  once,  for  he  was  too  tired  to  make  any  particular  prepara¬ 
tions  for  sleeping  and  had  also  to  guard  against  standing  on 
too  much  ceremony  with  his  host  and  hostess. 

He  had  almost  fallen  into  a  genuine  sleep  when  he  heard 
a  loud  cry  and  started  up  to  see  Brunelda  sitting  erect  on  the 
couch,  opening  her  arms  wide  and  flinging  them  round 
Delamarche,  who  was  kneeling  before  her.  Karl,  shocked  at 
the  sight,  lay  back  again  and  curled  up  among  the  curtains 
to  continue  his  sleep.  That  he  would  not  be  able  to  endure 
this  place  for  two  days  seemed  clear  enough  to  him;  yet  it 
was  all  the  more  necessary  to  have  a  thorough  sleep  to  begin 
with,  so  that  he  might  have  his  wits  about  him  and  be  able 
to  decide  quickly  on  the  right  course  of  action. 

206 


But  Brunelda  had  been  aware  of  Karl's  eyes,  big  with 
fatigue,  which  had  startled  her  once  already,  and  she  cried: 
‘Delamarche,  I  can't  bear  this  heat,  I'm  burning,  I  must  take 
off  my  clothes,  I  must  have  a  bath;  send  the  two  of  them  out 
of  the  room,  wherever  you  like,  into  the  passage,  on  to  the 
balcony,  so  long  as  they  are  out  of  my  sight !  Here  I  am  in 
my  own  home  and  yet  I  can't  get  any  peace.  If  I  were  only 
alone  with  you,  Delamarche !  Oh  God,  they’re  still  here  I 
Look  at  that  shameless  Robinson  sprawling  about  in  his 
underclothes  in  the  presence  of  a  lady.  And  look  at  that  boy, 
that  stranger,  who  has  just  been  staring  savagely  at  me,  how 
he  is  pretending  to  lie  down  again  to  fool  me.  Turn  them  out, 
Delamarche,  they're  a  burden  on  me,  they're  a  weight  on  my 
breast;  if  I  die  now  it  will  be  their  fault.’ 

‘Out  you  get  at  once,  out  of  here!'  said  Delamarche, 
advancing  on  Robinson  and  stirring  him  up  with  one  foot, 
which  he  put  on  his  chest.  Then  he  shouted  to  Karl :  ‘Ross- 
mann,  get  up  !  Out  on  the  balcony,  both  of  you !  And  it’ll  be 
your  funeral  if  you  come  in  here  before  you're  called !  Now 
look  slippy,  Robinson’  -  at  this  he  kicked  Robinson  more 
violently  -  ‘and  you,  Rossmann,  look  out  or  I'll  come  and 
attend  to  you  too,'  and  he  clapped  his  hands  loudly  twice. 

‘How  long  you're  taking !'  cried  Brunelda  from  the  sofa; 
she  had  spread  her  legs  wide  where  she  sat  so  as  to  get  more 
room  for  her  disproportionately  fat  body;  only  with  the 
greatest  effort  gasping  and  frequently  pausing  to  recover  her 
breath,  could  she  bend  far  enough  forward  to  catch  hold  of 
her  stockings  at  the  top  and  pull  them  down  a  little;  she 
could  not  possibly  take  off  her  own  clothes;  Delamarche 
would  have  to  do  that,  and  she  was  now  impatiently  waiting 
for  him. 

Quite  dazed  with  weariness,  Karl  crept  down  from  the 
heap  of  curtains  and  trailed  slowly  to  the  balcony  door;  a 
piece  of  curtain  material  had  wrapped  itself  round  his  foot 
and  he  dragged  it  indifferently  with  him.  In  his  distraction 
he  actually  said  as  he  passed  Brunelda:  ‘I  wish  you  good 

207 


night/  and  then  wandered  past  Delamarche,  who  was  draw¬ 
ing  aside  the  curtain  of  the  balcony  door,  and  went  out  on  to 
the  balcony.  Immediately  behind  him  came  Robinson,  who 
seemed  to  be  equally  sleep-sodden,  for  he  was  muttering  to 
himself :  ‘Always  being  ill-treated  !  If  Brunelda  doesn’t  come 
too  I’m  not  going  on  to  the  balcony.'  But  in  spite  of  this 
pronouncement  he  went  out  meekly  enough  on  the  balcony, 
where,  as  Karl  had  already  subsided  into  the  easy-chair,  he 
immediately  bedded  himself  on  the  stone  floor. 

When  Karl  awoke  it  was  evening,  the  stars  were  already 
out  and  behind  the  tall  houses  on  the  other  side  of  the  street 
the  moon  was  rising.  Not  until  he  had  surveyed  the  unknown 
neighbourhood  for  a  little  and  taken  a  few  breaths  of  the 
cool,  reviving  air  did  Karl  realize  where  he  was.  How  im¬ 
prudent  he  had  been;  he  had  neglected  all  the  counsels  of 
the  Manageress,  all  Therese’s  warnings,  all  his  own  fears;; 
here  he  was  sitting  calmly  on  Delamarche’s  balcony,  where  i 
he  had  slept  for  half  a  day  as  if  Delamarche,  his  mortal! 
enemy,  were  not  just  on  the  other  side  of  the  curtain.  Robin¬ 
son,  that  lazy  good-for-nothing,  was  sprawling  on  the  floor 
and  tugging  him  by  the  foot;  he  seemed  indeed  to  have? 
wakened  him  in  this  manner,  for  he  was  saying :  ‘How  you.] 
can  sleep,  Rossmann !  That’s  what  it  is  to  be  young  and] 
carefree.  How  long  do  you  want  to  go  on  sleeping  ?  I’d  have 
let  you  go  on  sleeping,  but  in  the  first  place  I’m  bored  with 
lying  on  the  floor,  and  in  the  second  place  I'm  terribly* 
hungry.  Come  on,  get  up  for  a  minute,  I’ve  got  somethings 
hidden  under  your  chair,  something  to  eat,  and  I  want  to  get! 
it  out,  I’ll  give  you  some  too.’  And  Karl,  getting  up,  looked 
on  while  Robinson,  without  getting  up,  rolled  over  on  his 
belly  and  reached  under  the  chair  to  pull  out  a  sort  of  silveri 
salver  such  as  is  used  for  holding  visiting-cards.  On  the  salven 
lay  one  half  of  a  quite  black  sausage,  a  few  thin  cigarettes 
an  open  sardine  tin  still  nearly  full  and  dripping  with  oil 
and  a  number  of  sweets,  most  of  them  squashed  into  a  mass  \ 
Then  appeared  a  big  hunk  of  bread  and  a  kind  of  perfumej 

208 


bottle,  which  seemed  to  contain  something  else  than  perfume, 
however,  for  Robinson  displayed  it  with  particular  satis¬ 
faction,  licking  his  lips  and  looking  up  at  Karl. 

‘You  see,  Rossman,'  said  Robinson,  while  he  devoured 
sardine  after  sardine  and  now  and  then  wiped  the  oil  off  his 
hands  with  a  woollen  scarf  which  Brunelda  had  apparently 
forgotten  on  the  balcony,  ‘you  see,  Rossmann,  that's  what  you 
need  to  do  if  you  don't  want  to  starve.  I  tell  you.  I’m  just 
kicked  out  of  the  way.  And  if  you're  always  treated  like  a 
dog,  you  begin  to  think  that  you’re  actually  one.  A  good 
thing  you’re  here,- Rossmann;  I  have  at  least  someone  to  talk 
to.  Nobody  in  the  building  speaks  to  me.  They  hate  us.  And 
all  because  of  Brunelda.  She’s  a  marvellous  woman,  of  course. 
I  say,'  -  and  he  gave  Karl  a  sign  to  bend  down,  so  that  he 
might  whisper  to  him  -  T  once  saw  her  naked.  Oh'  -  and  in 
the  memory  of  that  pleasure  he  began  to  pinch  and  slap 
Karl’s  leg  until  Karl  shouted :  ‘Robinson,  you’re  mad !  ’  and 
forcibly  pushed  his  hand  away. 

‘You’re  still  only  a  child,  Rossmann/  said  Robinson,  and 
from  under  his  shirt  he  pulled  out  a  dagger  that  he  wore  on 
a  cord  round  his  neck,  removed  the  sheath  and  began  to  slice 
up  the  hard  sausage.  Tou've  still  a  lot  to  learn.  But  you’ve 
come  to  the  right  place  to  learn  things.  Do  sit  down.  Won’t 
you  have  something  to  eat  too?  Well,  maybe  you’ll  get  an 
appetite* watching  me.  You  don't  want  a  drink,  either?  So 
you  don’t  want  anything  at  all.  And  you’re  not  much  in¬ 
clined  to  talk,  either.  But  I  don’t  care  who’s  on  the  balcony 
with  me,  so  long  as  there’s  somebody.  For  I'm  often  out  on 
the  balcony..  It’s  great  fun  for  Brunelda.  She  only  has  to  get 
an  idea  in  her  head  that  she’s  too  cold,  that  she's  too  hot,  that 
she  wants  to  sleep,  that  she  wants  to  comb  her  hair,  that  she 
wants  to  loosen  her  corset,  that  she  wants  to  put  it  on,  and 
then  she  has  me  sent  on  the  balcony.  Sometimes  she  actually 
does  what  she  says,  but  mostly  she  just  lies  on  the  couch  the 
same  as  before  and  never  moves.  I  used  sometimes  to  draw 
the  curtain  a  little  and  peep  through,  but  once  Delamarche 


209 


- 1  know  quite  well  that  he  didn't  want  to  do  it  and  only  did  | 
it  because  Brunelda  told  him  to  —  but  once  Delamarche  on 
one  of  these  occasions  struck  me  across  the  face  several  times 
with  the  whip  -  can  you  see  the  marks?  -  and  since  then  I 
haven’t  dared  to  peep  again.  And  so  I  just  lie  here  on  the 
balcony  and  have  nothing  to  do  but  eat.  The  night  before 
last,  as  I  lay  up  here  alone  all  evening,  I  still  had  on  the  fine 
clothes  which  I  had  the  bad  luck  to  lose  in  your  hotel  -  the : 
swine,  tearing  a  man's  expensive  clothes  off  his  back  -  well, 
as  I  lay  alone  and  looked  down  through  the  railings,  every¬ 
thing  seemed  so  miserable  that  I  began  to  blubber.  But  it  just 
happened,  without  my  noticing  it,  that  Brunelda  had  come 
out  here  in  her  red  gown  -  that  suits  her  far  the  best  of  them 
all  -  and  she  looked  at  me  for  a  little  while  and  said :  “Robin¬ 
son,  what  are  you  crying  for?"  Then  she  lifted  up  her  skirt: 
and  wiped  my  eyes  with  the  hem.  Who  knows  what  more: 
she  might  have  done  if  Delamarche  hadn’t  called  her  and  she; 
hadn’t  had  to  go  back  into  the  room  again  at  once.  I  thought,, 
of  course,  that  it  was  my  turn  next,  and  I  asked  through  the: 
curtain  if  I  couldn’t  come  in.  And  what  do  you  think: 
Brunelda  said?  “No  I"  said  she,  and  “what  are  you  thinking: 
of !  ’’  said  she.' 

‘But  why  do  you  stay  here  if  they  treat  you  like  that?' 
asked  Karl. 

‘Excuse  me,  Rossmann,  but  that's  a  stupid  question,’ 
replied  Robinson.  ‘You’ll  stay  here  too,  even  if  they  treat  you 
still  worse.  Besides,  they  don’t  treat  me  so  very  badly.' 

‘No,'  said  Karl,  ‘I’m  certainly  going  away,  and  this  very) 
evening  if  possible.  I’m  not  going  to  stay  with  you.’ 

‘And  how,  for  instance,  will  you  manage  to  get  awayj 
tonight?'  asked  Robinson,  who  was  digging  out  the  soT 
inside  of  the  loaf  and  carefully  dipping  it  into  the  oil  in  thcj 
sardine  box.  ‘How  are  you  going  to  leave  when  you  mustn’ 
even  go  into  the  room  ?  ’ 

‘And  why  shouldn’t  I  go  into  the  room  ? ' 

‘Because,  until  we’re  rung  for,  we  can’t  go  in,'  said  Robin  j 


210 


son,  opening  his  mouth  to  its  full  extent  and  devouring  the 
oily  bread,  while  in  the  hollow  of  one  hand  he  caught  the 
oil  that  dripped  from  it,  making  a  kind  of  reservoir  in  which 
he  dipped  the  rest  of  the  bread  from  time  to  time.  ‘Things  are 
much  stricter  now.  At  first  there  was  only  a  thin  curtain; 
you  couldn’t  actually  see  through  it,  but  in  the  evenings  you 
could  watch  their  shadows  on  it.  But  Brunelda  didn’t  like 
that,  and  so  I  had  to  turn  one  of  her  evening  cloaks  into  a 
curtain  and  hang  it  up  instead  of  the  old  one.  Now  you  can 
see  nothing  at  all.  Then  at  one  time  I  could  always  ask 
whether  I  might  go  in  and  they  used  to  say  yes  or  no  accord¬ 
ingly;  but  I  suppose  I  took  too  much  advantage  of  that  and 
asked  once  too  often.  Brunelda  couldn’t  bear  it  -  and  although 
she’s  so  fat  she’s  very  delicate,  she  often  has  headaches  and 
almost  always  gout  in  her  legs  -  and  so  it  was  decided  that  I 
mustn’t  ask  any  more,  but  that  I  could  go  in  whenever  the 
table  bell  was  rung.  That  rings  so  loudly  that  it  can  waken 
even  me  out  of  my  sleep  -  I  once  had  a  cat  here  to  cheer  me 
up,  but  she  was  so  scared  at  the  bell  that  she  ran  away  and 
never  came  back  again;  it  hasn’t  rung  today  yet,  you  see,  for 
when  it  does  ring,  I’m  not  only  allowed  to  go  in,  I  have  to  go 
in  -  and  when  such  a  long  time  goes  by  without  ringing,  it 
can  take  a  good  while  before  the  bell  rings  again/ 

‘Yes,’  said  Karl,  ‘but  what  applies  to  you  needn’t  apply  to 
me  at  all.  Besides,  that  kind  of  thing  only  applies  to  those 
who  put  up  with  it/ 

‘But/  cried  Robinson,  ‘why  shouldn’t  it  apply  to  you  as 
well?  Of  course  it  applies  to  you,  too.  You’d  better  stay 
quietly  here  with  me  until  the  bell  rings.  Then  of  course  you 
can  at  least  try  to  get  away/ 

‘What  is  it  really  that  keeps  you  here?  Simply  Delamarche 
is  your  friend,  or  rather  was  your  friend.  Do  you  call  this  a 
life?  Wouldn’t  it  be  better  for  you  in  Butterford,  where  you 
wanted  to  go  first?  Or  even  in  California,  where  you  have 
friends?’ 

‘Well,’  said  Robinson,  ‘nobody  could  have  told  that  this 


211 


was  going  to  happen/  And  before  continuing,  he  said :  To 
your  good  health,  my  dear  Rossmann/  and  took  a  long  pull  at 
the  perfume  bottle.  ‘We  were  hard  up  against  it  that  time 
when  you  let  us  down  so  meanly.  We  could  get  no  work  at 
all  the  first  day  or  two;  besides,  Delamarche  didn’t  want 
work,  he  could  easily  have  got  it,  but  he  always  sent  me  to 
look  for  it  instead,  and  I  never  have  any  luck.  He  just  loafed 
around,  but  by  the  evening  all  he  brought  back  with  him 
was  a  lady’s  handbag.  It  was  fine  enough,  made  of  pearls;  he 
gave  it  to  Brunelda  later,  but  there  was  almost  nothing  in  it. 
Then  he  said  we’d  better  try  begging  at  the  doors  -  you  can 
always  pick  up  something  or  other  that  way;  so  we  went 
begging  and  I  sang  in  front  of  the  houses  to  make  it  look 
better.  And  it  was  just  like  Delamarche’s  luck,  for  we  had 
only  been  a  minute  or  two  at  the  second  door,  a  very  grand 
flat  on  the  ground  floor,  and  sung  a  couple  of  songs  to  the 
cook  and  the  butler,  when  the  lady  the  flat  belonged  to, 
Brunelda  herself,  came  up  the  front  steps.  Maybe  she  was  too 
tightly  laced;  anyhow  she  couldn’t  get  up  to  the  top  of  these 
steps.  But  how  lovely  she  looked,  Rossmann  !  She  was  wearing 
a  white  dress  with  a  red  sunshade.  You  felt  you  could  eat  her. 
You  felt  you  could  drink  her  up.  God,  God,  she  was  lovely. 
What  a  woman  !  Tell  me  yourself,  how  can  such  a  woman  be  - 
possible?  Of  course  the  cook  and  the  butler  rushed  down  to 
her  at  once  and  almost  carried  her  up.  We  stood  on  either  ‘ 
side  of  the  door  and  raised  our  hats,  as  people  do  here.  She 
stopped  for  a  little,  for  she  hadn’t  quite  got  her  breath  back, 
and  I  don’t  know  how  it  actually  happened,  I  was  so  hungry 
I  didn’t  know  quite  what  I  was  doing,  and  close  at  hand  shei 
was  even  handsomer,  so  broad  and  yet  so  firm  everywhere! 
because  of  the  special  stays  she  had  on  -  I  can  let  you  seel 
them  in  the  trunk;  well,  I  couldn’t  help  touching  her  back,, 
but  quite  lightly,  you  know,  just  a  touch.  Of  course  it’si 
a  shocking  thing  for  a  beggar  to  touch  a  rich  lady.  I  only  just 
touched  her,  but  after  all  I  did  touch  her.  Who  knows  where: 
it  might  have  ended  if  Delamarche  hadn’t  given  me  a  clip! 


212 


on  the  ear,  and  such  a  clip  that  both  my  hands  flew  to  my 
own  face.’ 

‘What  things  to  do  ! '  said  Karl,  quite  absorbed  in  the  story, 
and  he  sat  down  on  the  floor.  ‘So  that  was  Brunelda?, 

‘Yes,’  said  Robinson,  ‘that  was  Brunelda.’ 

‘Didn’t  you  say  once  that  she  was  a  singer?’  asked  Karl. 

‘Certainly  she  is  a  singer,  and  a  great  singer,’  replied 
Robinson,  who  was  rolling  a  sticky  mass  of  sweetmeats  on 
his  tongue  and  now  and  then  pushing  back  with  his  finger 
some  piece  that  had  got  crowded  out  of  his  mouth.  ‘Of  course 
we  didn’t  know  that  at  the  time;  we  only  saw  that  she  was  a 
rich  and  very  fine  lady.  She  behaved  as  if  nothing  had  hap¬ 
pened,  and  perhaps  she  hadn’t  felt  anything,  for  I  had 
touched  her  really  only  with  the  tips  of  my  fingers.  But  she 
kept  looking  at  Delamarche,  who  stared  back  straight  into  her 
eyes  -  he  usually  hits  it  off  like  that.  Then  she  said  to  him: 
“Come  inside  for  a  little/’  and  pointed  with  her  sunshade 
into  the  house,  and  Delamarche  had  to  go  in  front  of  her. 
Then  the  two  of  them  went  in  and  the  servants  shut  the  door 
after  them.  As  for  me,  I  was  left  forgotten  outside,  and  since 
I  thought  it  wouldn’t  be  for  very  long,  I  sat  down  on  the 
steps  to  wait  for  Delamarche.  But  instead  of  Delamarche  the 
butler  came  out  bringing  me  a  whole  bowl  of  soup.  “A 
compliment  from  Delamarche !  ”  I  told  myself.  The  man  stood 
beside  me  for  a  time  while  I  ate  and  told  me  some  things 
about  Brunelda,  and  then  I  saw  how  important  this  visit 
might  be  for  us.  For  Brunelda  had  divorced  her  husband,  was 
very  wealthy  and  completely  independent  \  Her  ex-husband, 
a  cocoa  manufacturer,  was  still  in  love  with  her,  to  be  sure, 
but  she  refused  to  have  anything  whatever  to  do  with  him. 
He  often  called  at  the  flat,  always  dressed  in  great  style  as  if 
he  were  going  to  a  wedding  -  that’s  true,  word  for  word,  I 
kiiow  the  man  myself  -  but  in  spite  of  the  huge  tips  he  got, 
the  butler  never  dared  to  ask  Brunelda  whether  she  would 
receive  her  husband,  for  he  had  asked  her  before  once  or 
twice,  and  she  had  always  picked  up  anything  she  had  handy 


and  thrown  it  at  his  head.  Once  she  even  flung  her  big  hot- 
water  bottle  at  him  and  knocked  out  one  of  his  front  teeth. 
Yes,  Rossmann,  you  may  well  stare !  ’ 

'How  do  you  come  to  know  the  husband?’  asked  Karl. 

'He  often  comes  up  here,’  said  Robinson. 

'Here?’  In  his  astonishment  Karl  struck  the  floor  lightly 
with  his  hand. 

'You  may  well  be  surprised/  Robinson  went  on,  1  was 
surprised  myself  when  the  butler  stood  there  telling  me  all 
this.  Just  think,  whenever  Brunelda  was  out,  the  husband 
always  asked  the  butler  to  take  him  to  her  room,  and  he 
always  took  away  some  trifle  or  other  as  a  keepsake  and  left 
something  rare  and  expensive  for  Brunelda  in  return  and 
strictly  forbade  the  butler  to  say  who  had  left  it.  But  once  - 
the  servant  swears  it  and  I  believe  it  -  when  he  left  an 
absolutely  priceless  piece  of  porcelain,  Brunelda  must  have 
recognized  it  somehow,  for  she  flung  it  on  the  floor  at 
once,  stamped  upon  it,  spat  on  it  and  did  other  things  to 
it  as  well,  so  that  the  servant  could  hardly  carry  it  away 
for  disgust/ 

'But  what  had  her  husband  done  to  her?’  asked  Karl. 

'I  really  don’t  know/  said  Robinson.  'But  I  think  it  wasn’t 
anything  very  serious,  at  least  he  himself  doesn’t  know.  I 
have  often  talked  to  him  about  it.  I  have  an  appointment 
with  him  every  day  at  the  comer  of  the  street  over  there;  if 
I  can  come,  I  have  always  to  tell  him  the  latest  news;  if  I 
can’t  come,  he  waits  for  half  an  hour  and  then  goes  away 
again.  It  was  a  nice  extra  for  me  at  first,  for  he  paid  like  ai 
gentleman  for  the  news,  but  after  Delamarche  came  to  know- 
of  it  I  had  to  hand  over  the  money  to  him,  and  so  I  don’t  go 
down  there  so  often  now/ 

'But  what’s  the  man  after?’  asked  Karl.  'What  on  earth  is 
he  after?  He  surely  knows  that  she  doesn’t  want  him/ 

'Yes/  sighed  Robinson,  lighting  a  cigarette  and  fanning 
the  smoke  high  in  the  air  with  great  sweeps  of  his  arm.  Ther 
he  seemed  to  change  his  attitude  and  said:  ‘What  does  tha 


214 


matter  to  me?  All  I  know  is  that  he  would  give  a  lot  of 
money  to  be  able  to  lie  here  on  the  balcony  like  us/ 

Karl  got  up,  leant  against  the  railing  and  looked  down  into 
the  street.  The  moon  was  already  visible,  but  its  light  did  not 
yet  penetrate  into  the  depths  of  the  street.  Though  it  had 
been  so  empty  during  the  day,  the  street  was  now  crowded 
with  people,  particularly  before  the  house  doors;  they  were 
all  drifting  along  slowly  and  heavily,  the  shirt-sleeves  of  the 
men  and  the  light  dresses  of  the  women  standing  out  faintly 
against  the  darkness;  they  were  all  bareheaded.  The  various 
balconies  round  'about  were  now  fully  occupied;  whole 
families  were  sitting  there  by  the  light  of  electric  lamps, 
either  round  small  tables,  if  the  balcony  were  big  enough,  or 
in  a  single  row  of  armchairs  or  merely  sticking  their  heads 
out  of  their  living-rooms.  The  men  sat  at  ease  with  their  legs 
stretched  out,  their  feet  between  the  bars  of  the  railing, 
reading  newspapers  wdiich  extended  almost  to  the  floor,  or 
playing  cards,  apparently  without  speaking  but  to  the  accom¬ 
paniment  of  loud  bangs  on  the  table;  the  women’s  laps  were 
full  of  sewing-work,  and  they  had  nothing  but  a  brief  glance 
now  and  then  fcr  their  surroundings  or  the  street  below.  A 
fair,  delicate  woman  on  the  next  balcony  kept  on  yawning,  * 
turning  her  eyes  up  and  raising  to  her  mouth  a  piece  of 
underwear  which  she  was  mending;  even  on  the  smallest 
balconies  the  children  managed  to  chase  each  other  round 
and  make  themselves  a  nuisance  to  their  parents.  Inside  many 
of  the  rooms  gramophones  could  be  heard  grinding  out  songs 
or  orchestral  music;  nobody  paid  any  particular  attention  to 
this  music,  except  that  now  and  then  the  father  of  a  family 
would  give  a  sign  and  someone  would  hurry  into  the  room 
to  put  on  a  new  record.  At  some  of  the  windows  could  be 
seen  loving  couples  standing  quite  motionless;  one  of  these 
couples  was  standing  at  a  window  opposite;  the  young 
man  had  his  arm  round  the  girl  and  was  squeezing  her 
waist. 

‘Do  you  know  any  of  your  neighbours  here?’  Karl  asked 

“5 


Robinson,  who  had  now  also  got  to  his  feet,  and  feeling  cold 
had  huddled  himself  into  Brunelda’s  wrap  as  well  as  his 
blanket 

‘Hardly  one  of  them,  that's  the  worst  of  my  situation/ 
said  Robinson,  and  he  pulled  Karl  closer  so  as  to  whisper  in 
his  ear,  ‘or  else  I  wouldn't  have  much  to  complain  about  at 
the  moment.  Brunelda  has  sold  everything  she  had  for  the 
sake  of  Delamarche,  and  has  moved  with  all  she  possesses 
into  this  suburban  flat  in  order  to  devote  herself  entirely  to 
him  with, nobody  to  disturb  her;  besides,  that  was  what 
Delamarche  wanted  too.' 

‘And  she  has  dismissed  her  servants?'  asked  Karl. 

‘That's  so,'  said  Robinson.  ‘Where  could  you  find  accom¬ 
modation  for  servants  here?  Servants  like  that  expect  the 
best  of  everything.  In  Brunelda’s  old  flat  Delamarche  once 
simply  kicked  one  of  these  pampered  creatures  out  of  the 
room,  he  just  went  on  kicking  him  until  the  man  was  outside. 
The  other  servants  of  course  took  the  man's  side  and  staged  a 
row  before  the  door;  then  Delamarche  went  out  (I  wasn't  a 
servant  then,  but  a  friend  of  the  family,  yet  I  was  outside 
among  the  servants  all  the  same)  and  asked :  “What  do  you 
want?"  The  oldest  servant  a  man  called  Isidor,  told  him: 
“You  have  nothing  to  do  with  us;  we  are  engaged  by  the 
mistress."  I  suppose  you  notice  that  they  had  a  great  respect 
for  Brunelda.  But  Brunelda  paid  no  attention  to  them  and 
ran  up  to  Delamarche  -  she  wasn't  so  heavy  then  as  she  is 
now  -  and  embraced  and  kissed  him  before  them  all  and  called 
him  “darling  Delamarche".  And  then  she  said :  “Now  send 
these  fools  away."  Fools  -  that’s  what  she  called  the  servants; 
you  can  imagine  the  expression  on  their  faces.  Then  Brunelda 
took  Delamarche's  hand  and  drew  it  down  to  the  purse  she  i 
wore  at  her  belt;  Delamarche  put  in  his  hand  and  began  to  i 
pay  off  the  servants;  Brunelda  did  nothing  but  stand  there 
with  the  open  purse  at  her  waist.  Delamarche  had  to  put  his 
hand  in  over  and  over  again,  for  he  paid  out  the  money 
without  counting  it  and  without  checking  their  claims.  At 

216 


last  he  said :  “Since  you  won't  have  anything  to  do  with  me, 
I'll  only  say  in  Brunelda’s  name :  Get  out,  this  instant.”  So 
they  were  dismissed;  there  were  some  legal  proceedings  after¬ 
wards,  Delamarche  had  actually  to  go  once  to  court,  but  I 
don't  know  much  more  about  it.  Except  that  as  soon  as  the 
servants  had. gone  Delamarche  said  to  Brunelda:  “So  now 
you  have  no  servants.”  And  she  said :  “But  there’s  still 
Robinson.”  So  Delamarche  clapped  me  on  the  shoulder  and 
said:  “Very  well,  then,  you’ll  be  our  servant.”  And  then 
Brunelda  patted  me  on  the  cheek.  If  you  ever  get  a  chance, 
Rossmann,  you  should  get  her  to  pat  you  on  the  cheek  some 
time.  You’ll  be  surprised  how  lovely  it  feels.' 

‘So  you’ve  turned  into  Delamarche’s  servant,  have  you?' 
said  Karl,  summing  up. 

Robinson  heard  the  pity  in  his  voice  and  answered :  ‘I  may 
be  a  servant,  but  very  few  people  know  about  it.  You  see, 
you  didn’t  know  it  yourself,  although  you’ve  been  here  quite 
a  while.  Why,  you  saw  how  I  was  dressed  last  night  in  the 
hotel.  I  had  on  the  finest  of  fine  clothes.  Are  servants  dressed 
like  that?  The  only  thing  is  that  I  can’t  leave  here  very  often, 
I  must  always  be  at  hand,  there’s  always  something  to  do  in 
the  flat.  One  man  isn’t  really  enough  for  all  the  work.  You 
may  have  noticed  that  we  have  a  lot  of  things  standing  about 
in  the  room;  what  we  couldn’t  sell  at  the  removal  we  took 
with  us  here.  Of  course  it  could  have  been  given  away,  but 
Brunelda  gives  nothing  away.  You  can  imagine  what  it 
meant  to  carry  these  things  up  the  stairs.' 

‘Robinson,  did  you  carry  all  these  things  up  here?'  cried 
Karl. 

‘Why,  who  else  was  there  to  do  it?’  said  Robinson.  ‘I  had 
a  man  to  help  me,  but  he  was  a  lazy  rascal;  I  had  to  do  most 
of  the  work  alone.  Brunelda  stood  down  below  beside  the  van, 
Delamarche  decided  up  here  where  the  things  were  to  be 
put,  and  I  had  to  keep  rushing  up  and  down.  That  went  on 
for  two  days,  a  long  time,  wasn't  it?  But  you’ve  no  idea 
whatever  how  many  things  are  in  that  room;  all  the  trunks 

21 7 


are  full  and  behind  the  trunks  the  whole  place  is  crammed  I 
to  the  very  roof.  If  they  had  hired  a  few  men  for  the  trans¬ 
port,  everything  would  soon  have  been  finished,  but  Bruneldai 
wouldn't  trust  it  to  anyone  but  me.  That  was  flattering,  ofl 
course,  but  I  ruined  my  health  for  life  during  those  two  days, 
and  what  else  did  I  have  except  my  health?  Whenever  I  try 
to  do  the  least  thing,  I  have  pains  here  and  here  and  here. 
Do  you  think  these  boys  in  the  hotel,  these  young  jumping- 
jacks  -  for  that’s  all  they  are  -  would  ever  have  got  the  better 
of  me  if  I  had  been  in  good  health?  But  broken  down  as  E 
may  be.  I’ll  never  say  a  word  to  Delamarche  or  Brunelda;  I’ll 
work  on  as  long  as  I  can  and  when  I  can’t  do  it  any  longer 
I’ll  just  lie  down  and  die  and  then  they’ll  find  out,  too  late, 
that  I  was  really  ill  and  yet  went  on  working  and  worked: 
myself  to  death  in  their  service.  Oh  Rossmann  -’  he  ended, 
drying  his  eyes  on  Karl’s  shirt-sleeve.  After  a  while  he  said: 

‘  Aren't  you  cold,  standing  there  in  your  shirt  ?  ’ 

'Go  on,  Robinson,’  said  Karl,  ‘you’re  always  blubbering.  II 
don’t  believe  you’re  so  ill  as  all  that.  You  look  healthy  * 
enough,  but  lying  about  on  the  balcony  all  the  time  you: 
fancy  all  sorts  of  things.  You  may  have  an  occasional  pain  in: 
the  chest;  so  have  I,  so  has  everybody.  If  everybody  blubbered 
like  you  about  trifles,  there  would  be  nothing  but  blubbering 
on  all  these  balconies.’ 

‘I  know  better,’  said  Robinson,  wiping  his  eyes  with  tho 
comer  of  his  blanket.  ‘The  student  staying  next  door  witbr 
the  landlady  who  cooks  for  us  said  to  me  a  little  time  ago 
when  I  brought  back  the  dishes:  “Look  here,  Robinson 
you’re  ill,  aren’t  you?’’  I’m  not  supposed  to  talk  to  these 
people  and  so  I  simply  set  down  the  dishes  and  started  to  g( 
away.  Then  he  came  right  up  to  me  and  said :  Listen,  man  i 
don’t  push  things  too  far,  you’re  a  sick  man.”  “All  right  then 
what  am  I  to  do  about  it?”  I  asked  him.  “That’s  your  busi 
ness,”  he  said  and  turned  away.  The  others  sitting  at  the  table 
just  laughed,  they’re  all  our  enemies  round  here,  and  so  - 
thought  I’d  better  quit.’ 

218 


'So  you  believe  anyone  who  makes  a  fool  of  you,  and  you 
won’t  believe  anyone  who  means  well  by  you.' 

‘But  I  must  surely  know  how  I  feel/  exclaimed  Robinson 
indignantly,  beginning  to  cry  again  almost  at  once. 

‘You  don’t  know  what’s  really  wrong  with  you;  you 
should  only  find  some  decent  work  for  yourself,  instead  of 
being  Delamarche’s  servant.  So  far  as  I  can  tell  from  your 
account  of  it  and  from  what  I  have  seen  myself,  this  isn't 
service  here,  it’s  slavery.  Nobody  could  endure  it;  I  believe 
you  there.  But  because  you’re  Delamarche’s  friend  you  think 
you  can’t  leave  him.  That’s  nonsense;  if  he  doesn’t  see  what 
a  wretched  life  you’re  leading,  you  can’t  have  the  slightest 
obligation  to  him/ 

‘So  you  really  think,  Rossmann,  that  I  would  recover  my 
health  if  I  gave  up  working  here  ?  ’ 

‘Certainly/  said  Karl. 

‘Certainly?’  Robinson  asked  again. 

‘Quite  certainly/  said  Karl  smiling. 

‘Then  T  can  begin  recovering  straight  away/  said  Robinson, 
looking  at  Karl. 

‘How’s  that?’  asked  Karl. 

‘Why,  because  you  are  to  take  over  my  work  here/  replied 
Robinson. 

‘Who  on  earth  told  you  that?’  asked  Karl. 

‘Oh,  it’s  an  old  plan.  It’s  been  discussed  for  days.  It  began 
with  Brunelda  scolding  me  for  not  keeping  the  flat  clean 
enough.  Of  course  I  promised  to  put  everything  right  at  once. 
But,  well,  that  was  very  difficult.  For  instance,  in  my  state 
of  health,  I  can’t  creep  into  all  the  comers  to  sweep  away  the 
dust;  it’s  hardly  possible  to  move  in  the  middle  of  the  room, 
far  less  get  behind  the  furniture  and  the  piles  of  stuff.  And 
if  the  place  is  to  be  thoroughly  cleaned,  the  furniture  would 
have  to  be  shifted  about,  and  how  could  I  do  that  by  myself? 
Besides,  it  has  all  to  be  done  very  quietly  so  as  not  to  disturb 
Brunelda,  and  she  scarcely  ever  leaves  the  room.  So  I  promised 
to  give  everything  a  clean-up,  but  I  didn’t  actually  clean  it 

219 


up.  When  Brunelda  noticed  that,  she  told  Delamarche  that 
this  couldn’t  go  on  and  that  he  would  have  to  take  on  am 
assistant.  “I  don’t  want  you,  Delamarche,”  she  said,  “to 
reproach  me  at  any  time  for  not  running  the  house  properly. 
I  can’t  put  any  strain  upon  myself,  you  know  that  quite  well, 
and  Robinson  isn’t  enough;  in  the  beginning  he  was  fresh  I 
and  looked  after  everything,  but  now  he’s  always  tired  and! 
sits  most  of  the  time  in  a  comer.  But  a  room  with  so  many 
things  in  it  as  ours  needs  to  be  kept  in  order.”  So  Delamarche; 
considered  how  it  was  to  be  managed,  for  of  course  iti 
wouldn’t  do  to  take  anyone  and  everyone  into  such  a  house¬ 
hold  as  ours,  even  on  trial,  since  we’re  spied  on  from  all  sides- 
But  as  I  was  a  good  friend  of  yours  and  had  heard  from 
Rennell  how  you  had  to  slave  in  the  hotel,  I  suggested  your 
name.  Delamarche  agreed  at  once,  although  you  were  so  rude 
to  him  before,  and  of  course  I  was  very  glad  to  be  of  some 
use  to  you.  For  this  job  might  have  been  made  for  you;  you’re 
young,  strong  and  quick,  while  I’m  no  good  to  anyone.  But; 
I  must  tell  you  that  you’re  not  taken  on  yet;  if  Brunelda 
doesn’t  like  you,  that’s  the  end  of  it.  So  do  your  best  to  be 
pleasant  to  her;  I’ll  see  to  the  rest.’ 

'And  what  are  you  going  to  do  if  I  take  on  the  job? 
queried  Karl.  He  felt  quite  free;  he  had  got  over  the  first 
alarm  which  Robinson’s  announcement  had  caused  him.  So 
Delamarche  meant  no  worse  by  him  than  to  turn  him  into  a 
servant  -  if  he  h^d  had  more  sinister  intentions,  the  babbling 
Robinson  would  certainly  have  blabbed  them  -  but  if  thai 
was  how  things  stood,  Karl  saw  his  way  to  get  clear  of  the 
place  that  very  night.  No  one  could  be  compelled  to  take  a 
job.  And  though  at  first  he  had  been  worried  in  case  hi?, 
dismissal  from  the  hotel  would  hinder  him  from  getting  c 
suitable  and  if  possible  fairly  respectable  post  quickly  enough 
to  keep  him  from  starving,  any  post  at  all  now  seemed  gooc 
enough  compared  with  this  proposal,  which  repelled  him;  ht 
would  rather  be  unemployed  and  destitute  than  accept  iti 
But  he  did  not  even  try  to  make  that  clear  to  Robinson 


220 


particularly  as  Robinson’s  mind  was  now  completely  obsessed 
by  the  hope  of  shifting  his  burdens  on  to  Karl’s  shoulders. 

To  begin  with/  said  Robinson,  accompanying  the  words 
with  a  reassuring  wave  of  the  hand  -  his  elbows  were 
planted  on  the  railings  -  Til  explain  everything  and  show 
you  all  the  things  we  have.  You’ve  had  a  good  education  and 
I’m  sure  your  handwriting’s  excellent,  so  you  could  make  an 
inventory  straightaway  of  all  our  stuff.  Brunelda  has  been 
wanting  that  done  for  a  long  time.  If  the  weather’s  good 
tomorrow  morning  we’ll  ask  Brunelda  to  sit  out  on  the 
balcony,  and  we  can  work  quietly  in  the  room  without  dis¬ 
turbing  her.  For  that  must  be  your  first  consideration, 
Rossmann.  Brunelda  mustn’t  be  disturbed.  Her  hearing’s 
very  keen;  it’s  probably  because  she’s  a  singer  that  her  ears 
are  so  sensitive.  For  instance,  say  that  you’re  rolling  out  a 
keg  of  brandy  which  usually  stands  behind  the  trunks,  it 
makes  a  noise  because  it’s  heavy  and  all  sorts  of  things  are 
lying  about  on  the  floor,  so  that  you  can’t  roll  it  straight  out. 
Brunelda,  let  us  say,  is  lying  quietly  on  the  couch  catching 
flies,  which  are  a  great  torment  to  her.  You  think  she’s  paying 
no  attention  to  you,  and  you  go  on  rolling  the  keg.  She’s  still 
lying  there  quite  peacefully.  But  all  at  once,  just  when  you’re 
least  expecting  it  and  when  you’re  making  least  noise,  she 
suddenly  sits  up,  bangs  with  both  hands  on  the  couch  so  that 
you  can’t  see  her  for  dust  -  since  we  came  here  I  have  never 
beaten  the  dust  out  of  the  couch;  I  really  couldn’t,  she’s 
always  lying  on  it  -  and  begins  to  yell  ferociously,  like  a 
man,  and  goes  on  yelling  for  hours.  The -neighbours  have 
forbidden  her  to  sing,  but  no  one  can  forbid  her  to  yell;  she 
has  to  yell;  though  that  doesn’t  happen  often  now,  for  Dela- 
marche  and  1  have  grown  careful.  It  was  very  bad  for  her, 
too.  Once  she  fainted  -  Delamarche  was  away  at  the  time  - 
and  I  had  to  fetch  the  student  from  next  door,  who  sprinkled 
some  fluid  over  her  out  of  a  big  bottle;  it  did  her  good,  too, 
but  the  fluid  had  an  awfur smell;  even  now  you  can  smell  it 
if  you  put  your  nose  to  the  couch.  That  student  is  certainly 


221 


an  enemy  of  ours,  like  everybody  here;  you  must  be  on  youi 
guard  too  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  any  of  them/ 

'But  I  say,  Robinson/  remarked  Karl,  ‘this  is  a  heavy 
programme.  A  fine  job  this  that  you’ve  recommended  me 
for/ 

‘Don’t  you  worry/  said  Robinson,  shutting  his  eyes  ano 
shaking  his  head,  as  if  shaking  off  all  Karl’s  possible  worries 
‘This  job  has  advantages  that  you  wouldn’t  find  in  any  other 
You’re  always  in  close  attendance  on  a  lady  like  Bruneldai 
you  sometimes  sleep  in  the  same  room  as  she  does,  and,  aa 
you  can  imagine,  there’s  lots  of  enjoyment  to  be  got  out  o} 
that.  You’Ll  be  well  paid,  there’s  plenty  of  money  about;,' 
got  no  wages,  being  a  friend  of  Delamarche,  though  even 
time  I  went  out  Brunelda  always  gave  me  something,  bui 
you  of  course  will  be  paid  like  any  other  servant.  That’s  wha  \ 
you  are,  after  all.  But  the  most  important  thing  is  that  I’ll  b« 
able  to  make  your  job  much  easier  for  you.  Of  course 
won’t  do  anything  just  at  first,  to  give  myself  a  chance  o  i 
getting  better,  but  as  soon  as  I’m  even  a  little  better  you  can 
count  on  me.  In  any  case,  I’ll  do  all  the  waiting  on  Bruneldai 
doing  her  hair,  for  example,  and  helping  her  to  dress,  so  fai 
as  Delamarche  doesn’t  attend  to  that.  You’ll  only  have  tel 
concern  yourself  with  cleaning  the  room,  getting  in  what  w< 
need,  and  doing  the  heavy  housework/ 

‘No,  Robinson/  said  Karl,  ‘all  this  doesn’t  tempt  me/ 

‘Don’t  be  a  fool,  Rossmann,’  said  Robinson,  putting  his  fac: 
quite  close  to  Karl’s,  ‘don’t  throw  away  this  splendid  chance 
Where  will  you  get  another  job  so  quickly?  Who  know, 
you?  What  people  do  you  know?  The  two  of  us,  both  fuT 
grown  men  with  plenty  of  practical  skill  and  experience 
wandered  about  for  weeks  without  finding  work.  It  isnl 
easy;  in  fact  it’s  damned  difficult.’ 

Karl  nodded,  marvelling  that  Robinson  could  talk  si 
reasonably.  Still,  all  this  advice  was  beside  the  point  so  far  a 
he  was  concerned;  he  couldn’t  stay  here;  there  must  be  som 
place  for  him  in  the  great  city;  the  whole  night,  he  knew,  a 


222 


the  hotels  were  filled  to  bursting  and  the  guests  needed  ser¬ 
vice,  and  he  had  had  some  training  in  that.  He  would  slip 
quickly  and  unobtrusively  into  some  job  or  other.  Just  across 
the  street  there  was  a  small  restaurant  on  the  ground  floor, 
from  which  came  a  rush  of  music.  The  main  entrance  was 
covered  only  .with  a  big  yellow  curtain,  which  billowed  out 
into  the  street  now  and  then,  as  a  draught  of  air  caught  it. 
Otherwise  things  were  much  quieter  up  and  down  the  street. 
Most  of  the  balconies  were  dark;  only  far  in  the  distance  a 
single  light  was  twinkling  here  and  there;  but  almost  as  soon 
as  one  fixed  one's  eye  upon  it  the  people  beside  it  got  up  and 
thronged  back  into  the  house,  while  the  last  man  left  outside 
put  his  hand  to  the  lamp  and  switched  it  off  after  a  brief 
glance  at  the  street. 

‘It’s  nightfall  already,’  said  Karl  to  himself,  'if  I  stay  here 
any  longer  I’ll  become  one  of  them.’  He  turned  round  to  pull 
aside  the  curtain  of  the  balcony  door.  'What  are  you  doing?’ 
said  Robinson,  planting  himself  between  Karl  and  the 
curtain. 

‘I’m  leaving,’  said  Karl.  'Let  me  go !  Let  me  go  !’ 

'But  surely  you’re  not  going  to  disturb  her,’  cried  Robin¬ 
son,  'what  are  you  thinking  of !  ’  And  he  threw  his  arms 
round  Karl’s  neck,  clinging  to  him  with  all  his  weight  and 
twisting  his  legs  round  Karl’s  legs,  so  that  in  a  trice  he  had 
him  down  on  the  floor.  But  among  the  lift-boys  Karl  had 
learned  a  little  fighting,  and  so  he  drove  his  fist  against 
Robinson’s  chin,  not  putting  out  his  whole  strength,  to  avoid 
hurting  him.  Quickly  and  without  any  scruple  Robinson 
punched  him  in  the  belly  with  his  knee  before  beginning  to 
nurse  his  chin  in  both  hands,  and  let  out  such  a  howl  that  a 
man  on  the  next  balcony  clapped  his  hands  furiously  and 
shouted :  Silence  !  ’  Karl  lay  still  for  a  little  so  as  to  recover 
from  the  pain  of  Robinson’s  foul  blow.  He  turned  only  his 
head  to  watch  the  curtain  hanging  still  and  heavy  before  the 
room,  which  was  obviously  in  darkness.  It  looked  as  if  no  one 
were  in  the  room  now;  perhaps  Delamarche  had  gone  out 

223 


with  Brunelda  and  the  way  was  perfectly  free.  For  Robinsoi 
who  was  behaving  exactly  like  a  watch-dog,  had  been  final 
shaken  off. 

Then  from  the  far  end  of  the  street  there  came  in  fitf* 
blasts  the  sound  of  drums  and  trumpets.  The  single  shou 
of  individuals  in  a  crowd  soon  blended  into  a  general  roa 
Karl  turned  his  head  again  and  saw  that  all  the  balconh 
were  once  more  coming  to  life.  Slowly  he  got  up;  he  cou; 
not  stand  quite  straight  and  had  to  lean  heavily  against  tl 
railing.  Down  on  the  pavement  young  lads  were  stridir : 
along,  waving  their  caps  at  the  full  stretch  of  their  arms  an 
looking  back  over  their  shoulders.  The  middle  of  the  roa 
was  still  vacant.  Some  were  flourishing  tall  poles  with  lai 
terns  on  the  end  of  them  enveloped  in  a  yellowish  smok: 
The  drummers  and  the  trumpeters,  arrayed  in  broad  rank 
were  just  emerging  into  the  light  in  such  numbers  that  Ka 
was  amazed,  when  he  heard  voices  behind  him,  turned  roui  I 
and  saw  Delamarche  lifting  the  heavy  curtain  and  Brunela 
stepping  out  of  the  darkness  of  the  room,  in  the  red  gow 
with  a  lace  scarf  round  her  shoulders  and  a  dark  hood  o\l 
her  hair,  which  was  presumably  still  undressed  and  onj 
hastily  gathered  up,  for  loose  ends  straggled  here  and  then 
In  her  hand  she  held  a  little  fan,  which  she  had  opened  b« 
did  not  use,  keeping  it  pressed  close  to  her. 

Karl  moved  sideways  along  the  railing,  to  make  space  f 
the  two  of  them.  No  one,  surely,  would  force  him  to  sti: 
here,  and  even  if  Delamarche  tried  it  Brunelda  would  let  hi 
go  at  once  if  he  were  to  ask  her.  After  all,  she  couldn’t  stai i 
him;  his  eyes  terrified  her.  Yet  as  he  took  a  step  towards  tl 
door  she  noticed  it  and  asked :  'Where  are  you  going,  boy  i 
Delamarche’s  severe  eye  held  Karl  an  instant  and  Brunelc. 
drew  him  to  her.  ‘Don’t  you  want  to  see  the  procession  dow 
there?’  she  said,  pushing  him  before  her  to  the  railing.  ‘E 
you  know  what  it’s  about?’  Karl  heard  her  asking  behii 
him,  and  he  flinched  in  an  involuntary  but  unsuccessf 
attempt  to  escape  from  the  pressure  of  her  body.  He  gaze 

224 


down  sadly  at  the  street,  as  if  the  cause  of  his  sadness  lay 
there. 

For  a  while  Delamarche  stood  with  crossed  arms  behind 
Brunelda;  then  he  ran  into  the  room  and  brought  her  the 
opera  glasses.  Down  below  the  main  body  of  the  procession 
had  now  come  into  sight  behind  the  band.  On  the  shoulders 
of  a  gigantic  man  sat  a  gentleman  of  whom  nothing  could  be 
seen  at  this  height  save  the  faint  gleam  of  a  bald  crown,  over 
which  he  was  holding  a  top-hat  upraised  in  perpetual  greet¬ 
ing.  Round  about  him  great  wooden  placards  were  being 
carried  which,  seen  from  the  balcony,  looked  blankly  white; 
they  were  obviously  intended  to  make  a  sloping  rampart 
round  the  prominent  central  figure,  against  which  they  were 
literally  leaning.  But  since  the  bearers  were  moving  on  all 
the  time,  the  wall  of  placards  kept  falling  into  disrepair  and 
seeking  to  repair  itself  again.  Beyond  the  ring  of  placards,  so 
far  as  one  could  judge  in  the  darkness,  the  whole  breadth  of 
the  street,  although  only  a  trifling  part  of  its  length,  was 
filled  with  the  gentleman's  supporters,  who  clapped  their 
hands  in  rhythm  and  kept  proclaiming  in  a  chanting  cadence 
what  seemed  to  be  the  gentleman’s  name,  a  quite  short  but 
incomprehensible  name.  Single  supporters  adroitly  dis¬ 
tributed  among  the  &rowd  were  carrying  motor-car  lamps  of 
enormous  power,  which  they  slowly  shone  up  and  down  the 
houses  on  both  sides  of  the  street.  At  the  height  where  Karl 
was  the  light  was  not  unbearable,  but  on  the  lower  balconies 
he  could  see  people  hastily  putting  their  hands  over  their 
eyes  whenever  it  flashed  in  their  faces. 

At  Brunelda’s  request  Delamarche  inquired  of  the  people 
on  the  next  balcony  what  the  meaning  of  the  demonstration 
was.  Karl  was  somewhat  curious  to  note  whether  and  how 
they  would  answer  him.  And  actually  Delamarche  was 
forced  to  repeat  his  question  three  times  before  he  received 
an  answer.  .He  was  already  bending*  threateningly  over  the 
railing  and  Brunelda  had  begun  to  tap  with  one  foot  in 
exasperation  at  her  neighbours,  for  Karl  could  feel  her  knee 

225 


A. -II 


moving.  Finally  some  sort  of  answer  was  given,  but  simul¬ 
taneously  everyone  on  the  next  balcony,  which  was  packed 
with  people,  burst  out  into  loud  laughter.  At  that  Dela- 
marche  yelled  a  retort  so  loudly  that,  if  the  whole  street  had 
not  been  filled  with  noise  for  the  moment,  all  the  people 
round  about  must  have  pricked  up  their  ears  in  astonish^ 
ment.  In  any  case  it  had  the  effect  of  making  the  laughter 
cease  with  unnatural  abruptness. 

4 A  judge  is  being  elected  in  our  district  tomorrow,  and  the 
man  they  are  chairing  down  there  is  one  of  the  candidates, , 
said  Delamarche  quite  calmly,  returning  to  Brunelda.  ‘Oh ! 
he  went  on,  caressing  Brunelda’s  shoulder,  ‘we've  lost  aL 
idea  of  what’s  happening  in  the  world.’ 

‘Delamarche,’  said  Brunelda,  reverting  to  the  behaviour  oi 
her  neighbours,  ‘how  thankful  I  would  be  to  move  out  o* 
here,  if  it  wasn’t  such  an  effort.  But  unfortunately  I  can’^ 
face  it.’  And  sighing  deeply  she  kept  plucking  restlessly  ana 
distractedly  at  Karl’s  shirt;  as  unobtrusively  as  he  could  ho 
kept  pushing  away  her  plump  little  hand  again  and  again  i 
which  was  an  easy  matter,  for  Brunelda  was  not  thinking  oi^ 
him;  she  was  occupied  with  quite  other  thoughts. 

But  Karl  soon  forgot  her  and  suffered  the  weight  of  her 
arms  on  his  shoulders,  for  the  proceedings  in  the  street  tooll 
up  all  his  attention.  At  the  command  of  small  groups  o] 
gesticulating  men,  who  marched  just  in  front  of  the  candii 
date  and  whose  consultations  must  have  had  a  particular 
importance,  for  one  could  see  attentive  faces  turned  to  then 
from  all  sides,  a  halt  was  abruptly  called  before  the  little 
restaurant.  A  member  of  this  authoritative  group  made  * 
signal  with  his  upraised  hand  which  seemed  to  apply  to  th« 
crowd  and  to  the  candidate  as  well.  The  crowd  fell  silent  anc 
the  candidate,  who  tried  several  times  to  stand  upright  ano 
several  times  fell  back  again  on  the  shoulders  of  his  bearer 
made  a  short  speech,  waving  his  top-hat  to  and  fro  at  light! 
ning  speed.  He  could  be  seen  quite  clearly,  for  during  hL 
speech  all  the  motor-car  lamps  were  directed  upon  him 

226 


so  that  he  found  himself  in  the  centre  of  a  bright  star  of 
light. 

Now,  too,  one  could  realize  the  interest  which  the  whole 
street  took  in  the  occurrence.  On  the  balconies  where  sup¬ 
porters  of  the  candidate  were  packed,  the  people  joined  in 
chanting  his  name,  stretching  their  hands  far  over  the  railings 
and  clapping  with  machine-like  regularity.  On  the  opposi¬ 
tion  balconies,  which  were  actually  in  the  majority,  a  howl 
of  retaliation  arose  which,  however,  did  not  achieve  a  unified 
effect,  as  it  came  from  rival  supporters  of  various  candidates. 
However,  all  the  enemies  of  the  present  candidate  united  in 
a  general  cat-calling,  and  even  many  of  the  gramophones 
were  set  going  again.  Between  the  separate  balconies  political 
disputes  were  being  fought  out  with  a  violence  intensified  by 
the  late  hour.  Most  of  the  people  were  already  in  their  night¬ 
clothes,  with  overcoats  flung  over  them;  the  women  were 
enveloped  in  great  dark  wraps;  the  children,  with  nobody 
to  attend  to  them,  climbed  dangerously  about  the  railings  of 
the  balcony  and  came  swarming  more  and  more  out  of  the 
dark  rooms  in  which  they  had  been  sleeping.  Here  and  there 
unrecognizable  objects  were  being  flung  by  particularly 
heated  partisans  in  the  direction  of  their  enemies;  sometimes 
they  reached  their  mark,  but  most  of  them  fell  down  into  the 
street,  where  they  provoked  yells  of  rage.  When  the  noise 
became  too  much  for  the  leading  man  in  the  procession,  the 
drummers  and  trumpeters  received  orders  to  intervene,  and 
their  blaring,  long-drawn-out  flourish,  executed  with  all  the 
force  of  which  they  were  capable,  drowned  every  human 
voice  up  to  the  very  house-tops.  And  then  quite  suddenly  - 
almost  before  one  realized  it  -  they  would  stop,  whereupon 
the  crowd  in  the  street,  obviously  trained  for  this  purpose, 
at  once  launched  their  party  song  into  the  momentary 
general  silence  -  one  could  see  all  their  mouths  wide  open  in 
the  light  of  the  motor-caj  lamps  -'until  their  opponents, 
coming  to  their  senses  again,  yelled  ten  times  as  loudly  as 
before  from  all  the  balconies  and  windows,  and  the  party 

227 


below,  after  their  brief  victory,  were  reduced  to  complete 
silence,  at  least  for  anyone  standing  at  this  height. 

'How  do  you  like  it,  boy?’  asked  Brunelda,  who  kept 
turning  and  twisting  close  behind  Karl,  so  as  to  see  as  much 
as  possible  through  her  glasses.  Karl  merely  answered  with  a 
nod  of  the  head.  He  noticed  out  of  the  corner  of  his  eye 
that  Robinson  was  busily  talking  away  to  Delamarche, 
obviously  about  Karl's  intentions,  but  that  Delamarche 
seemed  to  attach  no  importance  to  what  he  said,  for  with  his 
right  arm  round  Brunelda  he  kept  pushing  Robinson  aside 
with  his  left.  'Wouldn’t  you  like  to  look  through  the  glasses?' 
asked  Brunelda,  tapping  Karl  on  the  chest  to  show  that  she 
meant  him. 

'I  can  see  well  enough/  said  Karl. 

'Do  try/  she  said,  ‘you’ll  see  much  better/ 

'I  have  good  eyes/  replied  Karl,  ‘I  can  see  everything.’  He 
did  not  feel  it  as  a  kindness  but  as  a  nuisance  when  she  put! 
the  glasses  before  his  eyes,  with  the  mere  words,  ‘Here,  you  I’1 
uttered  melodiously  enough  but  threateningly.  And  nowj 
the  glasses  were  before  Karl’s  eyes  and  he  could  see  nothing! 
at  all. 

'I  can’t  see  anything/  he  said,  trying  to  get  away  from  the! 
glasses,  but  she  held  them  firmly,  and  his  head,  which  was1 
pressed  against  her  breast,  he  could  move  neither  backwards 
nor  sideways. 

'But  you  can  see  now/  she  said,  turning  the  screw. 

'No,  I  still  can’t  see  anything,’  said  Karl,  and  he  thought 
that  in  spite  of  himself  he  had  relieved  Robinson  of  his  duties 
after  all,  for  Brunelda’s  insupportable  whims  were  now  being 
wreaked  on  him. 

‘When  on  earth  are  you  going  to  see?’  she  said,  and  turner1 
the  screw  again;  Karl’s  whole  face  was  now  exposed  to  her 

heavy  breath.  ‘Now?’  she  asked. 

'No,  no,  no!’  cried  Karl,  although  he  could  actually 
distinguish  everything  now,  though  very  vaguely.  But  a* 
that  moment  Brunelda  thought  of  something  to  say  t( 

228 


Delamarche;  she  held  the  glasses  loosely  before  Karl's  face, 
and  without  her  noticing  it  he  could  peep  under  the  glasses 
at  the  street.  After  that  she  no  longer  insisted  on  having  her 
way  and  used  the  glasses  for  her  own  pleasure. 

From  the  restaurant  below  a  waiter  had  emerged  and 
dashing  in  and  out  of  the  door  took  orders  from  the  leaders. 
One  could  see  him  standing  on  his  toes  so  as  to  overlook  the 
interior  of  the  establishment  and  summon  as  many  of  the 
staff  as  possible.  During  these  preparations  for  what  was 
obviously  a  round  of  free  drinks,  the  candidate  never  stopped 
speaking.  The  man  who  was  carrying  him,  the  giant  specially 
reserved  for  him,  kept  turning  round  a  little  after  every  few 
sentences,  so  that  the  address  might  reach  all  sections  of  the 
crowd.  The  candidate  maintained  a  crouching  posture  most 
of  the  time,  and  tried  with  backward  sweeps  of  his  free  hand 
and  of  the  top-hat  in  the  other  to  give  special  emphasis  to  his 
words.  But  every  now  and  then,  at  almost  regular  intervals, 
the  flow  of  his  eloquence  proved  too  much  for  him;  he  rose 
to  his  full  height  with  outstretched  arms,  he  was  no  longer 
addressing  a  group  but  the  whole  multitude;  he  spoke  to  all 
the  people  in  the  houses  up  to  the  very  top  floors,  and  yet  it 
was  perfectly  clear  that  no  one  could  hear  him  even  in  the 
lowest  storeys;  indeed,  even  if  they  could,  nobody  would 
have  wanted  to  hear  him,  for  every  window  and  every 
balcony ’was  occupied  by  at  least  one  spouting  orator.  Mean¬ 
while  several  waiters  were  carrying  out  of  the  restaurant  a 
table  covered  with  brimming,  winking  glasses,  about  the  size 
of  a  billiard-table.  The  leaders  organized  the  distribution  of 
the  drinks,  which  was  achieved  in  the  form  of  a  march  past 
the  restaurant.  But  although  the  glasses  on  the  table  were 
always  filled  again,  there  were  not  enough  for  the  mob  of 
people,  and  two  relays  of  barmen  had  to  keep  slipping 
through  the  crowd  on  both  sides  of  the  table  to  supply  fur¬ 
ther  needs.. The  candidate  had,  of  course,  stopped  speaking 
and  was  employing  the  pause  in  refreshing  his  energies. 
His  bearer  carried  him  slowly  backwards  and  forwards, 


229 


somewhat  apart  from  the  crowd  and  the  harsh  light,  and 
only  a  few  of  his  closest  supporters  accompanied  him  and 
threw  remarks  to  him. 

Look  at  the  boy/  said  Brunelda,  Tie's  so  busy  staring  that 
he  s  quite  forgotten  where  he  is/  And  she  took  Karl  by  sur¬ 
prise,  turning  his  face  towards  her  with  both  hands,  so  that 
she  was  gazing  into  his  eyes.  But  it  lasted  only  a  minute,  for 
Karl  shook  her  hands  off  at  once  and,  annoyed  that  they 
would  not  leave  him  in  peace  and  also  eager  to  go  down  to 
the  street  and  see  everything  close  at  hand,  tried  with  all  his 
might  to  free  himself  from  Brunelda's  grip  and  said: 

‘Please,  let  me  go  away/ 

Tou’ll  stay  with  us/  said  Delamarche,  without  turning 
his  eyes  from  the  street,  merely  stretching  out  his  hand  to 
prevent  Karl  from  going. 

‘Leave  him  alone/  said  Brunelda,  pushing  away  Dela- 
marche's  hand,  Tie’ll  stay  all  right/  And  she  squeezed  Karl 
still  more  firmly  against  the  railing,  so  that  he  would  have 
had  to  struggle  with  her  to  get  away  from  her.  And  even  if 
he  were  to  free  himself,  what  could  he  gain  by  that !  Dela¬ 
marche  was  standing  on  his  left,  Robinson  had  now  moved 
across  to  his  right;  he  was  literally  a  prisoner. 

‘Count  yourself  lucky  that  you're  not  thrown  out/  said 
Robinson,  tapping  Karl  with  the  hand  he  had  hooked 
through  Brunelda's  arm. 

‘Thrown  out?'  said  Delamarche.  Tou  don't  throw  out  a 
runaway  thief;  you  hand  him  over  to  the  police.  And  that 
might  happen  to  him  the  very  first  thing  tomorrow  morning 
if  he  doesn't  keep  quiet.' 

From  that  moment  Karl  had  no  further  pleasure  in  the 
spectacle  below.  Simply  because  he  could  not  help  it,  being 
crushed  against  Brunelda  and  unable  to  straighten  himself, 
he  leaned  forward  a  little  over  the  railing.  Full  of  his  own 
trouble,  he  gazed  absently  at  the  people  below,  who  marched 
up  to  the  table  before  the  restaurant  in  squads  of  about 
twenty  men,  seized  the  glasses,  turned  round  and  waved  them 

230 


in  the  direction  of  the  recuperating  candidate,  shouted  a 
party  slogan,  emptied  the  glasses  and  set  them  down  on  the 
table  again  with  what  must  have  been  a  great  clatter  that 
was,  however,  inaudible  at  this  height,  in  order  to  make 
room  for  the  next  noisy  and  impatient  squad.  On  the  instruc¬ 
tions  of  the  -party  leaders  the  brass  band  which  had  been 
playing  in  the  restaurant  came  out  into  the  street;  their 
great  wind  instruments  glittered  against  the  dark  crowd,  but 
the  music  was  almost  lost  in  the  general  din.  The  street  was 
now,  at  least  on  the  side  where  the  restaurant  stood,  packed 
far  and  wide  with'  human  beings.  From  up  the  hill,  the  direc¬ 
tion  from  which  Karl's  taxi  had  arrived  that  morning,  they 
came  streaming  down;  from  as  far  as  the  low-lying  bridge 
they  came  rushing  up;  and  even  the  people  in  the  adjoining 
houses  could  not'  resist  the  temptation  to  take  a  personal  part 
in  this  affair;  on  the  balconies  and  at  the  windows  there  was 
hardly  anyone  left  but  women  and  children,  while  the  men 
came  pouring  out  of  the  house-doors  down  below.  By  now 
the  music  and  the  free  drinks  had  achieved  their  aim;  the 
assembly  was  great  enough  at  last;  one  of  the  leaders,  flanked 
on  either  side  by  headlamps,  signalled  the  band  to  stop  play- 
ing  and  gave  a  loud  whistle,  and  at  once  the  man  carrying 
the  candidate  hastily  turned  back  and  could  be  seen 
approaching  through  a  path  opened  for  him  by  supporters. 

The  Candidate  had  barely  reached  the  restaurant  door 
when  he  began  a  new  speech  in  the  blaze  of  the  headlamps, 
which  were  now  concentrated  upon  him  in  a  narrow  ring. 
But  conditions  were  much  less  comfortable  than  before.  His 
gigantic  bearer  had  now  no  initiative  at  all  in  movement, 
for  the  crowd  was  too  dense.  His  chief  supporters,  who  had 
previously  done  their  best  in  all  kinds  of  ways  to  enhance  the 
effect  of  his  words,  now  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  keeping 
near  him,  and  only  about  twenty  of  them  managed  to  retain 
their  footing  beside  the  bearer.  Even* he,  strong  giant  as  he 
was,  could  not  take  a  step  of  his  own  free  will,  and  it  was 
out  of  the  question  to  think  of  influencing  the  crowd  by 

231 


turning  to  face  this  section  or  that,  by  making  dramatic 
advances  or  retreats.  The  mob  was  flowing  backwards  anil 
forwards  without  plan,  each  man  propelled  by  his  neighbour, 
not  one  braced  on  his  own  feet;  the  opposition  party  seemed  I 
to  have  gained  a  lot  of  new  recruits;  the  bearer,  after  stem¬ 
ming  the  tide  for  a  while  outside  the  restaurant  door,  was, 
now  letting  himself  be  swept  up  and  down  the  street,, 
apparently  without  resistance;  the  candidate  still  kept  oni 
uttering  words,  but  it  was  no  longer  clear  whether  he  wasi 
outlining  his  programme  or  shouting  for  help;  and  unless 
Karl  was  mistaken  a  rival  candidate  had  made  his  appearance,, 
or  rather  several  rivals,  for  here  and  there,  when  light  sud¬ 
denly  flared  up,  some  figure  could  be  seen,  high  on  the 
shoulders  of  the  crowd  orating  with  white  face  and  clenched 
fists  to  an  accompaniment  of  massed  cheering. 

'What  on  earth  is  happening  down  there?'  asked  Karl, 
turning  in  breathless  bewilderment  to  his  warders. 

'How  it  excites  the  boy/  said  Brunelda  to  Delamarche, 
taking  hold  of  Karl's  chin  so  as  to  turn  his  face  towards  her. 
But  that  was  something  Karl  did  not  desire,  and  made  quite 
reckless  by  the  events  down  in  the  street  he  gave  himself 
such  a  jerk  that  Brunelda  not  only  let  him  go  but  recoiled 
and  left  him  quite  to  himself.  'You  have  seen  enough  now/, 
she  said,  obviously  angered  by  Karl's  behaviour,  'go  into  the 
room,  make  the  bed  and  get  everything  ready  for  the  night/ 
She  pointed  towards  the  room.  That  was  the  very  direction 
Karl  had  wanted  to  take  for  hours  past,  and  he  made  nc 
objection  at  all.  Then  from  the  street  came  a  loud  crash  of 
breaking  glass.  Karl  could  not  restrain  himself  and  took  a 
flying  leap  to  the  railing  for  a  last  hasty  look  down.  The 
opposition  had  brought  off  a  grand  coup,  perhaps  a  decisive 
one;  the  car  head-lamps  of  the  candidate's  party,  which  had 
thrown  a  powerful  light  on  at  least  the  central  figures  and 
afforded  a  measure  of  publicity  which  controlled  the  proceed¬ 
ings  up  to  a  point,  had  all  been  simultaneously  smashed  and 
the  candidate  and  his  bearer  were  now  received  into  tho 


embrace  of  the  general  uncertain  street  lighting,  which  in 
its  sudden  diffusion  had  the  effect  of  complete  darkness.  No 
one  could  have  guessed  even  approximately  the  candidate’s 
whereabouts,  and  the  illusoriness  of  the  darkness  was  still 
more  enhanced  by  a  loud  swelling  chorus  in  unison  which 
suddenly  broke  out  from  the  direction  of  the  bridge  and  was 
coming  nearer. 

'Haven’t  I  told  you  what  to  do?’  said  Brunelda.  'Hurry 

up.  I’m  tired,’  she  added,  stretching  her  arms  above  her  so 

that  her  bosom  arched  out  even  more  than  before.  Dela- 

$ 

marche,  whose  arm  was  still  round  her,  drew  her  into  a  comer 
of  the  balcony.  Robinson  followed  them  to  push  out  of  the 
way  the  remains  of  his  supper,  which  were  still  lying 
there. 

Such  a  favourable  opportunity  was  not  to  be  let  slip;  this 
was  no  time  for  Karl  to  look  down  at  the  street;  he  would 
see  enough  of  what  was  happening  there  once  he  was  down 
below,  much  better  than  from  up  here.  In  two  bounds  he  was 
through  the  room  with  its  dim  red  lighting,  but  the  door  was 
locked  and  the  key  taken  away.  It  must  be  found  at  once;  yet 
who  could  expect  to  find  a  key  in  this  disorder  and  above  all 
in  the  little  space  of  precious  time  which  Karl  had  at  his 
disposal.  Actually  he  should  be  on  the  stairs  by  now,  running 
and  running.  Instead  of  which  he  was  hunting  for  a  key  1  He 
looked  in  all  the  drawers  that  would  open,  rummaged  about 
on  the  table,  where  various  dishes,  table  napkins  and  pieces 
of  half-begun  embroidery  were  lying  about,  was  allured  next 
by  an  easy-chair  on  which  lay  an  inextticable  heap  of  old 
clothes  where  the  key  might  possibly  be  hidden  but  could 
never  be  found,  and  flung  himself  finally  on  the  couch,  which 
was  indeed  evil-smelling,  so  as  to  feel  in  all  its  nooks  and 
comers  for  the  key.  Then  he  stopped  looking  and  came  to  a 
halt  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  Brunelda  was  certain  to  have 
the  key  fastened  to  her  belt,  he  told*himself;  so  many  things 
hung  there;  all  searching  was  in  vain. 

And  blindly  Karl  seized  two  knives  and  thrust  them 

*33 


between  the  wings  of  the  door,  one  above  and  one  below,  so  as 
to  get  the  greatest  purchase  on  it  from  two  separate  points. 
But  scarcely  did  he  brace  himself  against  the  knives  when  the 
blades  of  course  broke  off.  He  wished  for  nothing  better; 
the  stumps,  with  which  he  could  now  get  closer,  would  hold 
the  more  firmly.  And  now  he  wrenched  at  them  with  all  his 
strength,  his  arms  outstretched,  his  legs  wide  apart,  panting 
and  yet  carefully  watching  the  door  at  the  same  time.  It 
could  not  resist  for  much  longer;  he  realized  that  with  joy 
from  the  audible  loosening  of  the  lock;  but  the  more  slowly 
he  went  the  better;  the  lock  mustn't  burst  open,  or  else  they 
would  hear  it  on  the  balcony;  it  must  loosen  itself  quite 
gradually;  and  he  worked  with  great  caution  to  bring  this 
about,  putting  his  face  closer  and  closer  to  the  lock. 

'Just  look  at  this,'  he  heard  the  voice  of  Delamarche.  All 
three  of  them  were  standing  in  the  room;  the  curtain  was 
already  drawm  behind  them;  Karl  could  not  have  heard  them 
entering;  and  at  the  sight  of  them  he  let  go  the  knives.  But 
he  was  given  no  time  to  utter  a  word  of  explanation  or 
excuse,  for  in  a  fit  of  rage  far  greater  than  the  occasion 
merited  Delamarche  leaped  at  him,  the  loose  cord  of  his 
dressing-gown  describing  a  long  figure  in  the  air.  At  the  very 
last  moment  Karl  evaded  his  attack;  he  could  have  pulled  the 
knives  from  the  door  and  defended  himself  with  them,  but  he 
did  not  do  so;  instead,  ducking  down  and  then  springing  up, 
he  seized  the  broad  collar  of  Delamarche’s  dressing-gown, 
jerked  it  upwards,  then  pulled  it  still  farther  over  -  the 
dressing-gown  was  far  too  big  for  Delamarche  -  and  now  by 
good  luck  had  a  hold  on  the  head  of  Delamarche,  who,  taken 
completely  by  surprise,  pawed  wildly  with  his  hands  at  first 
and  only  after  a  moment  or  two  began  to  beat  Karl  on  the 
back  with  his  fists,  but  with  less  than  his  full  strength,  while 
Karl,  to  protect  his  face,  flung  himself  against  Delamarche's 
chest.  Karl  endured  the  blows,  though  they  made  him  twust 
with  pain  and  kept  increasing  in  violence,  for  it  was  easy  to 
bear  them  when  he  thought  he  saw  victory  before  him. 


234 


With  his  hands  round  Delamarche’s  head  the  thumbs  just 
over  the  eyes,  he  pushed  him  towards  the  part  of  the  room 
where  the  furniture  stood  thickest  and  at  the  same  time 
with  the  toe  of  his  shoe  tried  to  twist  the  cord  of  the  dressing- 
gown  round  Delamarche’s  legs  to  trip  him  up. 

But  since. he  had  to  bend  all  his  attention  on  Delamarche, 
whose  resistance  he  could  feel  growing  more  and  more  and 
whose  sinewy  body  was  bracing  itself  with  greater  enmity 
against  him,  he  actually  forgot  that  he  was  not  alone  in  the 
room  with  Delamarche.  Only  too  soon  the  reminder  came, 
for  suddenly  his- feet  flew  from  under  him,  being  wrenched 
apart  by  Robinson,  who  was  lying  shrieking  behind  him  on 
the  floor.  Panting,  Karl  let  go  his  hold  of  Delamarche,  who 
recoiled  a  little.  Brunelda,  her  legs  straddling,  her  knees 
bent,  a  bulky  figure  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  was  following 
the  fight  with  glittering  eyes.  As  if  she  herself  were  taking 
part  in  it  she  was  breathing  deeply,  screwing  up  her  eyes  and 
slowly  advancing  her  fists.  Delamarche  flung  back  the  collar 
of  his  dressing-gown  and  now  had  the  use  of  his  eyes;  of 
course,  it  was  no  longer  a  fight  but  simply  a  punishment.  He 
seized  Karl  by  the  shirt-front,  lifted  him  nearly  off  the  floor 
and  without  even  looking  at  him  in  his  contempt  flung  him 
so  violently  against  a  chest  standing  a  few  steps  away  that  at 
first  Karl' thought  the  searing  pains  in  his  back  and  head 
caused  *by  the  collision  were  the  direct  result  of  Delamarche's 
handling.  ‘You  scoundrel !’  he  could  hear  Delamarche  shout¬ 
ing  in  the  darkness  that  rose  before  his  wavering  eyes.  And 
as  he  sank  down  fainting  beside  the  chest  the  words  Tou  just 
wait !  ’  still  rang  dimly  in  his  ears. 

When  he  came  to  his  senses  everything  was  dark  around 
him;  it  seemed  to  be  late  in  the  night;  from  the  balcony  a 
faint  glimmer  of  moonlight  came  into  the  room  beneath  the 
curtain.  He  could  hear  the  regular  breathing  of  the  three 
sleepers;  by  far  the  loudest  noise  came  from  Brunelda,  who 
snorted  in  her  sleep  as  she  sometimes  did  in  talking;  yet  it 
was  not  easy  to  make  out  where  the  different  sleepers  were 

235 


f°r  whole  room  was  filled  with  the  sound  of  their 
breathing.  Not  until  he  had  examined  his  surroundings  for 
a  little  while  did  Karl  think  of  himself,  and  then  he  was 
struck  with  alarm,  for  though  he  was  quite  cramped  and 
stiff  with  pain  he  had  not  imagined  that  he  could  have  been 
severely  wounded  to  the  effusion  of  blood.  Yet  now  he  felt  a 
weight  on  his  head,  and  his  whole  face,  his  neck,  and  his 
breast  under  the  shirt  were  wet  as  if  with  blood.  He  must 
get  into  the  light  to  find  out  exactly  what  condition  he  was 
in;  perhaps  they  had  crippled  him,  in  which  case  Delamarche 
would  be  glad  enough  to  let  him  go;  but  what  could  he  hope 
to  do  if  that  were  so;  there  would  be  no  prospects  for  him  at 
all.  The  lad  with  the  nose  half-eaten  away  occurred  to  him, 
and  for  a  moment  he  buried  his  face  in  his  hands. 

Then  involuntarily  he  turned  towards  the  outside  door 
and  groped  his  way  towards  it  on  all  fours.  Presently  he  felt 
a  shoe  and  then  a  leg  under  his  finger-tips.  That  must  be 
Robinson;  who  else  would  sleep  in  his  shoes?  They  must  have 
ordered  him  to  lie  across  the  door  so  as  to  keep  Karl  from 
escaping.  But  didn’t  they  know,  then,  the  condition  that 
Karl  was  in?  For  the  moment  he  was  not  thinking  of  escape; 
he  merely  wanted  to  reach  the  light.  So,  as  he  couldn’t  get 
out  by  the  door,  he  must  make  for  the  balcony. 

He  found  the  dining-table  in  a  quite  different  place  from 
the  evening  before;  the  couch,  which  he  approached  very 
cautiously,  was  to  his  surprise  vacant;  but  in  the  middle  of 
the  room  he  came  upon  a  high  though  closely  compressed 
pile  of  clothes,  blankets,  curtains,  cushions  and  carpets.  At 
first  he  thought  it  was  only  a  small  pile,  like  the  one  he  had 
found  at  the  end  of  the  couch  the  previous  evening,  and  that 
it  had  merely  happened  to  fall  on  the  floor;  but  to  his 
astonishment  he  discovered  on  creeping  farther  that  a  whole 
van-load  of  such  things  was  lying  there,  which,  presumably 
for  use  in  the  night,  must  have  been  taken  out  of  the  trunks 
where  they  were  kept  during  the  day.  He  crept  right  round 
the  pile  and  soon  realized  that  the  whole  formed  a  sort  of 

236 


bed,  on  top  of  which,  as  he  discovered  by  feeling  cautiously, 
Delamarche  and  Brunelda  were  sleeping. 

So  now  he  knew  where  they  all  were  and  made  haste  to 
reach  the  balcony.  It  was  quite  a  different  world  on  the 
other  side  of  the  curtain,  and  he  quickly  rose  to  his  feet.  In 
the  fresh  night  air  he  walked  up  and  down  the  balcony  a  few 
times  in  the  full  radiance  of  the  moon.  He  looked  down  at 
the  street;  it  was  quite  still;  music  was  still  issuing  from  the 
restaurant,  but  more  subdued  now;  a  man  was  sweeping  the 
pavement  before  the  door;  in  the  street  where  only  a  few 
hours  ago  the  tumult  had  been  so  great  that 'the  shouting  of 
an  electoral  candidate  could  not  be  distinguished  among  a 
thousand  other  voices,  the  scratching  of  the  broom  on  the 
flagstones  could  be  distinctly  heard. 

The  scraping  of  table-legs  on  the  next  balcony  made  Karl 
aware  that  someone  was  sitting  there  reading.  It  was  a  young 
man  with  a  little  pointed  beard,  which  he  kept  continually 
twisting  as  he  read,  his  lips  moving  rapidly  at  the  same  time. 
He  was  facing  Karl,  sitting  at  a  little  table  covered  with 
books;  he  had  taken  the  electric  lamp  from  the  parapet  and 
shored  it  between  two  big  volumes,  so  that  he  sat  in  a  flood 
of  garish  light. 

'Good  evening/  said  Karl,  for  he  thought  he  noticed  the 
young  man  glancing  at  him. 

But  that  must  have  been  an  error,  for  the  young  man, 
apparently  quite  unaware  of  him,  put  his  hand  to  his  eyes  to 
shield  them  from  the  light  and  make  out  who  had  suddenly 
spoken  to  him,  and  then,  still  unable  to  see  anything,  held 
up  the  electr|c  lamp  so  as  to  throw  some  light  on  the  next 
balcony. 

'Good  evening/  he  said  then  in  return,  with  a  brief,  pene¬ 
trating  look,  adding :  ‘And  what  do  you  want?’ 

4Am  I  disturbing  you?’  asked  Karl. 

‘Of  course,  of  course/  said  the  m^n,  returning  the  lamp 
again  to  its  former  place. 

These  words  certainly  discouraged  any  attempt  at 

*37 


intercourse,  but  all  the  same  Karl  did  not  quit  the  comer 
of  the  balcony  nearest  to  the  man.  Silently  he  watched  him 
reading  his  book,  turning  the  pages,  now  and  then  looking 
up  something  in  another  book,  which  he  always  snatched 
up  at  lightning  speed,  and  frequently  making  notes  in  a 
jotter,  which  he  did  with  his  face  surprisingly  close  to  the 
paper. 

Could  this  man  be  a  student?  It  certainly  looked  as  if  he 
were.  Not  very  unlike  this  -  a  long  time  ago  now  -  Karl  had 
sat  at  home  at  his  parents’  table  writing  out  his  school  task s, 
while  his  father  read  the  newspaper  or  did  book-keeping  and 
correspondence  for  a  society  to  which  he  belonged,  and  his* 
mother  was  busy  sewing,  drawing  the  thread  high  out  ofi 
the  stuff  in  her  hand.  To  avoid  disturbing  his  father,  Karl 
used  to  lay  only  the  exercise  book  and  his  writing  materials' 
on  the  table,  while  he  arranged  his  reference  books  on  chairs' 
to  right  and  left  of  him.  How  quiet  it  had  been  there !  Hown 
seldom  strangers  had  visited  their  home !  Even  as  a  small 
child  Karl  had  always  been  glad  to  see  his  mother  turning 
the  key  in  the  outside  door  of  an  evening.  She  had  no  ideai 
that  he  had  come  to  such  a  pass  as  to  try  breaking  open: 
strange  doors  with  knives. 

And  what  had  been  the  point  of  all  his  studying?  He  haclj 
forgotten  everything;  if  he  had  been  given  the  chance  olj 
continuing  his  studies  here,  he  would  have  found  it  a  very] 
hard  task.  Once,  he  remembered,  he  had  been  ill  for  a  whole 
month  at  home;  what  an  effort  it  had  cost  him  afterwards  tc 
get  used  to  his  interrupted  studies  again.  And  now,  except 
for  the  hand-book  of  English  commercial  correspondence,  he 
had  not  read  a  book  for  ever  so  long. 

T  say,  young  man,’  Karl  found  himself  suddenly  addressed 
"couldn’t  you  stand  somewhere  else?  You  disturb  me  fright! 
fully,  staring  at  me  like  that.  After  two  o’clock  in  the  morn 
ing  one  can  surely  expect  to  be  allowed  to  work  in  peace  on 
a  balcony.  Do  you  want  anything  from  me?’ 

"Are  you  studying  ?  ’  asked  Karl. 

238  J. 


Tes,  yes/  said  the  man,  taking  advantage  of  this  wasted 
moment  to  bring  new  order  among  his  books. 

Then  I  won’t  disturb  you/  said  Karl,  ‘I’m  going  indoors 
again,  in  any  case.  Good  night/ 

The  man  did  not  even  answer;  with  abrupt  resolution  he 
had  returned  to  his  book  again  after  dealing  with  the  dis¬ 
turbance,  his  head  leaning  heavily  on  his  right  hand. 

But  just  before  he  reached  the  curtain  Karl  remembered 
why  he  had  actually  come  out;  he  did  not  even  know  how 
much  he  had  been  hurt.  What  could  it  be  that  was  lying  so 
heavy  on  his  head?  He  put  his  hand  up  and  stared  in 
astonishment.  There  was  no  bloodstained  wound  such  as  he 
had  feared  in  the  darkness  of  the  room,  but  only  a  turban¬ 
like  bandage  which  was  still  rather  wet.  To  judge  from  little 
frills  of  lace  hanging  from  it  here  and  there,  it  had  been  tom 
from  an  old  chemise  of  Brunelda’s,  and  Robinson  must  have 
wrapped  it  hurriedly  round  his  head.  But  he  had  forgotten 
to  wring  it  out,  and  so  while  Karl  was  unconscious  the  water 
had  dripped  down  his  face  and  under  his  shirt,  and  that  was 
what  had  given  him  such  a  shock. 

'Are  you  still  there?’  asked  the  man,  peering  across. 

Tm  really  going  now/  said  Karl,  T  only  wanted  to  look 
at  something;  it’s  quite  dark  indoors/ 

‘But  who  are  you?’  said  the  man,  laying  his  pen  on  the 
open  book  before  him  and  advancing  to  the  railing.  ‘What’s 
your  name?  How  do  you  come  to  be  with  these  people? 
Have  you  been  long  here?  What  did  you  want  to  look  at? 
Turn  on  the  electric  light  there,  won’t  you,  so  that  I  can 
see  you/ 

Karl  obeyed,  but  before  answering  he  drew  the  curtain 
more  closely  to  keep  those  inside  from  noticing  anything. 
‘Excuse  me,’  he  said  in  a  whisper,  ‘for  not  raising  my  voice 
more.  If  they  were  to  hear  me  there  would  be  another 
row/ 

‘Another?’  asked  the  man. 

‘Yes/  said  Karl,  ‘I  had  a  terrible  row  with  them  this  very 

239 


evening.  I  must  still  have  a  pretty  bad  bump  on  my  head.1. 
And  he  felt  the  back  of  his  head. 

'What  was  the  trouble?1  asked  the  man,  and  as  Karl  did 
not  at  once  reply,  he  added :  Tou  can  safely  tell  me  anything 
you  have  against  these  people.  For  I  hate  all  three  of  them/ 
and  the  Madam  in  particular.  Besides,  I’d  be  surprised  to 
find  that  they  hadn’t  put  you  against  me  already.  My  name 
is  Joseph  Mendel  and  I  am  a  student.1 

'Well/  said  Karl,  ‘they’ve  told  me  about  you  already,  bul 
nothing  bad.  You  doctored  Brunelda  once,  didn’t  you?' 

'That’s  right,’  said  the  student,  laughing.  ‘Does  the  couch 
still  stink  of  it?1 

'Oh  yes,1  said  Karl. 

'I’m  glad  of  that,  anyway,1  said  the  student,  passing  hfc 
fingers  through  his  hair.  ‘And  why  do  they  give  you  bump*- 
on  the  head?1 

'We  had  a  quarrel,1  said  Karl,  wondering  how  he  was  to 
explain  it  to  the  student.  Then  he  checked  himself  ana 
asked :  ‘But  am  I  not  disturbing  you  ? 1 

'In  the  first  place,’  said  the  student,  'you  have  already 
disturbed  me,  and  I  am  unluckily  so  nervous  that  I  need  a 
long  time  to  get  into  my  stride  again.  Ever  since  you  began 
to  walk  about  your  balcony  I  haven’t  been  able  to  get  on 
with  my  studies.  And  then  in  the  second  place  I  always  have 
a  breather  about  three  o'clock.  So  you  needn’t  have  any] 
scruples  about  telling  me.  Besides,  I’m  interested.’ 

'It’s  quite  simple,’  said  Karl,  ‘Delamarche  wants  me  to  ba 
his  servant.  But  I  don’t  want  to.  I  should  have  liked  to  leava 
this  very  night.  He  wouldn’t  let  me  go,  and  he  locked  tha 
door;  I  tried  to  break  it  open  and  then  there  was  a  row.  I  m 
unlucky  to  be  still  here.’ 

'Why,  have  you  got  another  job?’  asked  the  student. 

'No,1  said  Karl,  ‘but  that  doesn’t  worry  me  in  the  least  b 

I  could  only  get  away  from  here.’ 

‘What,’  said  the  student,  'it  doesn’t  worry  you  in  the  least: 
doesn’t  it?’  And  both  of  them  were  silent  for  a  moment 


240 


'Why  don’t  you  want  to  stay  with  these  people?’  the  student 
asked  at  last. 

‘Delamarche  is  a  bad  man/  said  Karl,  ‘I’ve  encountered 
him  before.  I  tramped  for  a  whole  day  with  him  once  and  I 
was  glad  to  be  out  of  his  company.  And  am  I  to  be  his  servant 
now?’  * 

‘If  all  servants  were  as  fastidious  in  their  choice  of  masters 
as  you  are !’  said  the  student,  and  he  seemed  to  be  smiling. 
Took  here,  during  the  day  I’m  a  salesman,  a  miserable 
counter-jumper,  not  much  more  than  aij  errand-boy,  in 
Mon tly’s  big  store.  This  Montly  is  certainly  a  scoundrel, 
but  that  leaves  me  quite  cold;  what  makes  me  furious  is 
simply  that  the  pay  is  wretched.  Let  that  be  an  example 
to  you.’ 

‘What?’  said  Karl.  Tou  are  a  salesman  all  day  and  you 
study  all  night?’  I 

Tes,’  said  the  student,  ‘there’s  nothing  else  to  be  done. 
I’ve  tried  everything  possible,  but  this  is  the  best  way.  For 
years  I  did  nothing  but  study,  day  and  night,  and  I  almost 
didn’t  dare  attend  lectures  in  the  clothes  I  had  to  wear.  But 
that’s  all  behind  me  now.’ 

‘But  when  do  you  sleep  ?  ’  asked  Karl,  looking  at  the  student 
in  wonder. 

‘Oh,  sleep  !’  said  the  student.  ‘I’ll  get  some  sleep  when  I’m 
finished  with  my  studies.  I  keep  myself  going  on  black  coffee.’ 
And  he  turned  round,  drew  a  big  bottle  from  under  the  table, 
poured  black  coffee  from  it  into  a  little  cup  and  tossed  it 
down  his  throat  as  if  it  were  medicine  which  he  wanted  to 
get  quickly  over,  to  avoid  the  taste. 

‘A  fine  thing,  black  coffee,’  said  the  student.  ‘It’s  a  pity 
you’re  too  far  away  for  me  to  reach  you  some.’ 

‘I  don’t  like  black  coffee,’  said  Karl. 

‘I  don’t  either,’  said  the  student,  laughing.  ‘But  what  could 
I  do  without  it?  If  it  weren’t  for  black^coffee  Montly  wouldn’t 
keep  me  for  a  minute.  I  say  Montly  although  of  course  he’s 
not  even  aware  of  my  existence.  I  simply  don’t  know  how  I 

241 


would  get  on  in  the  shop  if  I  didn’t  have  a  big  bottle  like  this 
under  the  counter,  for  I’ve  never  dared  to  risk  stopping  the  i 
coffee-drinking;  but  you  can  believe  me  that  if  I  did  I  would 
roll  down  behind  the  counter  in  a  dead  sleep.  Unfortunately  i 
the  others  have  tumbled  to  that,  they  call  me  “Black  Coffee”,, 
a  silly  witticism  which  I’m  sure  has  damaged  my  careen 
already.’ 

‘And  when  will  you  be  finished  with  your  studies?’  asked  I 
Karl. 

‘I’m  getting  on  slowly,’  said  the  student  with  drooping j 
head.  He  left  the  railing  and  sat  down  again  at  the  table; 
planting  his  elbows  on  the  open  book  and  passing  his  fingers 
through  his  hair,  he  said  then:  ‘It  might  take  me  another' 
year  or  two.’ 

‘I  wanted  to  study  too,’  said  Karl,  as  if  that  gave  him  at 
claim  to  be  on  a  more  confidential  footing  than  the  student, 
now  fallen  silent,  had  seen  fit  to  grant. 

‘Indeed?’  said  the  student,  and  it  was  not  quite  clear' 
whether  he  was  reading  his  book  again  or  merely  staring! 
absently  at  it.  ‘You  can  be  glad  that  you’ve  given  up  study¬ 
ing.  I’ve  studied  for  years  now  simply  for  the  sake  of  mere! 
consistency.  I  get  very  little  satisfaction  out  of  it  and  eveni 
less  hope  for  the  future.  What  prospects  could  I  have? 
America  is  full  of  quack  doctors.’ 

‘I  wanted  to  be  an  engineer,’  put  in  Karl  quickly,  as  the ' 
student  seemed  to  be  losing  all  interest. 

‘And  now  you’re  supposed  to  be  a  servant  to  these  people,’ 
said  the  student,  glancing  up  for  a  moment,  ‘that  annoys  i 
you,  of  course.’ 

This  conclusion  sprang  from  a  misunderstanding,  but  Karl  I 
felt  that  he  might  turn  it  to  his  advantage.  So  he  asked:  \ 
‘Perhaps  I  could  get  a  job  in  the  store  too?’ 

The  question  detached  the  student  completely  from  hisi 
book,  but  the  idea  that  he  might  be  of  some  help  to  Karl  in  i 
applying  for  such  a  post  did  not  enter  his  mind  at  all.  ‘Youi 
try  it,’  he  said,  ‘or  rather  don’t  you  try  it.  Getting  a  job  at 

242 


Montly’s  is  the  biggest  success  I’ve  ever  scored.  If  I  had  to 
give  up  either  my  studies  or  my  job,  of  course  I’d  give  up 
my  studies;  I  spend  all  my  energy  trying  to  keep  off  the 
horns  of  that  dilemma.’ 

‘So  it’s  as  hard  as  that  to  get  a  job  in  Montly’s,’  said  Karl 
more  to  himself  than  to  the  student. 

‘Why,  what  do  you  think?’  said  the  student.  ‘It’s  easier  to 
be  appointed  district  judge  here  than  a  door-opener  at 
Montly’s.’ 

Karl  fell  silent.  This  student,  who  was  so  much  more 
experienced  than'  he  was  and  who  hated  Delamarche  for 
some  unknown  reason  and  who  certainly  felt  no  ill-will 
towards  himself,  could  not  give  him  a  single  word  of  en¬ 
couragement  to  leave  Delamarche.  And  yet  he  didn’t  know 
anything  about  the  danger  threatening  Karl  from  the  police, 
which  only  Delamarche  could  shield  him  from  at  the 
moment. 

‘You  saw  the  demonstration  down  there  this  evening, 
didn’t  you?  Anyone  who  didn’t  know  the  ropes  could  easily 
imagine,  couldn’t  he,  that  the  candidate,  Lobster  is  his  name, 
would  have  some  prospect  of  getting  in  or  at  least  of  being 
considered?’ 

‘I  know  nothing  about  politics/  said  Karl. 

‘That’s  a  mistake,’  said  the  student.  ‘But  you  have  eyes 
and  ears  in  your  head,  haven’t  you?  The  man  obviously  has 
friends  and  opponents;  that  surely  can’t  have  escaped  you. 
Well,  in  my  opinion  the  fellow  hasn’t  the  slightest  prospect 
of  being  returned.  I  happen  to  know  all  about  him;  there’s  a 
man  staying  here  who’s  an  acquaintance  of  his.  He’s  not 
without  ability,  and  as  far  as  his  political  views  and  his 
political  past  are  concerned,  he  would  actually  be  the  most 
suitable  judge  for  the  district.  But  no  one  even  imagines  that 
he  can  get  in;  he’ll  come  as  big  a  cropper  as  anyone  can;  he’ll 
have  chucked  away  his  dollars  on  tffe  election  campaign  and 
that  will  be  all.’ 

Karl  and  the  student  gazed  at  each  other  for  a  little  while 

243 


in  silence.  The  student  nodded  smilingly  and  pressed  his 
hand  against  his  weary  eyes. 

* Well,  aren’t  you  going  to  bed  yet?’  he  asked.  T  must  startj 
on  my  reading  again.  Look,  how  much  I  have  still  to  do/ 
And  he  fluttered  over  half  the  pages  of  the  book,  to  give  Karlj 
an  idea  of  the  work  that  still  awaited  him. 

'Well  then,  good  night/  said  Karl,  with  a  bow. 

'Come  over  and  see  us  sometime/  said  the  student,  who 
had  sat  down  at  the  table  again,  ‘of  course,  only  if  you  would 
like  to.  You’ll  always  find  lots  of  company  here.  And  I  can| 
always  have  time  for  you  from  nine  till  ten  in  the  evening,  j 

‘So  you  advise  me  to  stay  with  Delamarche?’  asked  Karl. 

'Absolutely/  said  the  student,  whose  head  was  already] 
bent  over  his  book.  It  was  as  if  not  he  but  someone  else  haq 
said  the  word;  it  echoed  in  Karl’s  ears  as  if  it  had  been  utterec  j 
by  a  voice  more  hollow  than  the  student’s.  Slowly  he  wenr 
up  to  the  curtain,  glanced  once  more  at  the  student,  whci 
now  sat  quite  motionless  in  his  ring  of  light,  surrounded  by 
the  vast  darkness,  and  slipped  into  the  room.  The  uniteci 
breathing  of  the  three  sleepers  received  him.  He  felt  his  way] 
along  the  wall  to  the  couch,  and  when  he  found  it  calmly] 
stretched  himself  out  on  it  as  if  it  were  his  familiar  bed  I 
Since  the  student,  who  knew  all  about  Delamarche  and  th«< 
queer  circumstances,  and  who  was  moreover  an  educated 
man,  had  advised  him  to  stay  here,  he  had  no  qualms  for  tht| 
time  being.  He  did  not  have  such  high  aims  as  the  student : 
perhaps  even  at  home  he  would  never  have  succeeded  in 
carrying  his  studies  to  their  conclusion;  and  if  it  were  diffii 
cult  to  do  that  at  home,  no  one  could  expect  him  to  manage i 
it  here  in  a  strange  land.  But  his  prospects  of  finding  a  pos  i 
in  which  he  could  achieve  something,  and  be  appreciated  fo} 
his  achievement,  would  be  greater  if  he  accepted  the  servant’/ 
place  with  Delamarche  for  the  time  being  and  from  thaa 
secure  position  watched  for  a  favourable  opportunity.  In  thi-j 
very  street  there  appeared  to  be  many  offices  of  middling  03 
inferior  status,  which  in  case  of  need  might  not  be  too 


244 


fastidious  in  picking  their  staff.  He  would  be  glad  to  take  on 
a  porter’s  job,  if  necessary,  but  after  all  it  was  not  utterly 
impossible  that  he  might  be  taken  on  simply  for  office  work, 
and  in  the  future  might  sit  at  his  own  desk  as  a  regular  clerk, 
gazing  occasionally  out  of  the  open  window  with  a  light 
heart,  like  the  clerk  whom  he  had  seen  that  morning  on  his 
expedition  through  the  courtyards.  As  he  shut  his  eyes  he 
was  comforted  by  the  reflection  that  he  was  still  young  and 
that  some  day  or  other  he  was  bound  to  get  away  from  Dela- 
marche;  this  household  certainly  did  not  look  as  if  it  were 
established  for  alt  eternity.  Once  he  got  such  a  post  in  an 
office,  he  would  concentrate  his  mind  on  his  office  work;  he 
would  not  disperse  his  energies  like  the  student.  If  it  should 
be  necessary,  he  would  devote  his  nights  as  well  as  his  days 
to  his  office  wdrk,  which  at  the  start  might  be  actually 
expected  of  him,  considering  his  meagre  knowledge  of  busi¬ 
ness  matters.  He  would  think  only  of  the  interests  of  the 
firm  he  had  to  serve,  and  undertake  any  work  that  offered, 
even  work  which  the  other  clerks  rejected  as  beneath  them. 
Good  intentions  thronged  into  his  head,  as  if  his  future 
employer  were  standing  before  the  couch  and  could  read 
them  from  his  face. 

On  such  thoughts  Karl  fell  asleep,  and  only  in  his  first 
light  slumber  was  disturbed  by  a  deep  sigh  from  Brunelda, 
who  was  apparently  troubled  by  bad  dreams  and  twisted 
and  turned  on  her  bed. 


8.  The  Nature  Theatre  of  Oklahoma 


At  a  street  comer  Karl  saw  a  placard  with  the  followingj 
announcement:  The  Oklahoma  Theatre  will  engage  meim 
bers  for  its  company  today  at  Clayton  race-course  from  sixi 
o’clock  in  the  morning  until  midnight.  The  great  Theatre  o}j 
Oklahoma  calls  you !  Today  only  and  never  again !  If  youj 
miss  your  chance  now  you  miss  it  for  ever !  If  you  think  oij 
your  future  you  are  one  of  us !  Everyone  is  welcome  !  If  you 
want  to  be  an  artist,  join  our  company !  Our  Theatre  can 
find  employment  for  everyone,  a  place  for  everyone  1  If  yoi^ 
decide  on  an  engagement  we  congratulate  you  here  and  now  3 
But  hurry,  so  that  you  get  in  before  midnight !  At  twelve 
o'clock  the  doors  will  be  shut  and  never  opened  again  !  Down 
with  all  those  who  do  not  believe  in  us !  Up,  and  tc< 
Clayton ! 

A  great  many  people  were  certainly  standing  before  thei 
placard,  but  it  did  not  seem  to  find  much  approval.  Theru 
were  so  many  placards;  nobody  believed  in  them  any  longer  - 
And  this  placard  was  even  more  improbable  than  usual  1 
Above  all,  it  failed  in  an  essential  particular,  it  did  not  men¬ 
tion  payment.  If  the  payment  were  worth  mentioning  at  all 
the  placard  would  certainly  have  mentioned  it;  that  most 
attractive  of  all  arguments  would  not  have  been  forgotten. 
No  one  wanted  to  be  an  artist,  but  every  man  wanted  to  bo 
paid  for  his  labours. 

Yet  for  Karl  there  was  one  great  attraction  in  the  placard. 
‘Everyone  is  welcome,'  it  said.  Everyone,  that  meant  Karl 
too.  All  that  he  had  done  till  now  was  ignored;  it  was  noti 
going  to  be  made  a  reproach  to  him.  He  was  entitled  to  apply* 

246 


for  a  job  of  which  he  need  not  be  ashamed,  which,  on  the 
contrary,  was  a  matter  of  public  advertisement.  And  just  as 
public  was  the  promise  that  he  too  would  find  acceptance.  He 
asked  for  nothing  better;  he  wanted  to  find  some  way  of  at 
least  beginning  a  decent  life,  and  perhaps  this  was  his  chance. 
Even  if  all  the  extravagant  statements  in  the  placard  were  a 
lie,  even  if  the  great  Theatre  of  Oklahoma  were  an  insig¬ 
nificant  travelling  circus  it  wanted  to  engage  people,  and 
that  was  enough.  Karl  did  not  read  the  whole  placard  over 
again,  but  once  more  singled  out  the  sentence :  ‘Everyone  is 
welcome.'  At  first'he  thought  of  going  to  Clayton  on  foot; 
yet  that  would  mean  three  hours  of  hard  walking,  and  in  all 
possibility  he  might  arrive  just  in  time  to  hear  that  every 
available  vacancy  had  been  filled.  The  placard  certainly  sug¬ 
gested  that  there  were  no  limits  to  the  number  of  people 
who  could  be  engaged,  but  all  advertisements  of  that  kind 
were  worded  like  that.  Karl  saw  that  he  must  either  give  it 
up  or  else  go  by  train.  He  counted  over  his  money,  which 
would  last  him  for  eight  days  yet  if  he  did  not  take  this 
railway  journey;  he  slid  the  little  coins  backwards  and  for¬ 
wards  on  the  palm  of  his  hand.  A  gentleman  who  had  been 
watching  him  clapped  him  on  the  shoulder  and  said :  ‘All 
good  luck  for  your  journey  to  Clayton.’  Karl  nodded  silently 
and  reckoned  up  his  money  again.  But  he  soon  came  to  a 
decision,  counted  out  the  money  he  needed  for  the  fare  and 
rushed  to  the  underground  station.  When  he  got  out  at 
Clayton  he  heard  at  once  the  noise  of  many  trumpets.  It  was 
a  confused  blaring;  the  trumpets  were  not  in  harmony  but 
were  blown  regardless  of  each  other.  Still,  that  did  not  worry 
Karl;  he  took  it  rather  as  a  confirmation  of  the  fact  that  the 
Theatre  of  Oklahoma  was  a  great  undertaking.  But  when  he 
emerged  from  the  station  and  surveyed  the  lay-out  before 
him,  he  realized  that  it  was  all  on  a  much  larger  scale  than 
he  could  have  conceived  possible,  and  he  did  not  understand 
how  any  organization  could  make  such  extensive  prepara¬ 
tions  merely  for  the  purpose  of  taking  on  employees.  Before 

247 


the  entrance  to  the  race-course  a  long  low  platform  had  bee 
set  up,  on  which  hundreds  of  women  dressed  as  angels  i 
white  robes  with  great  wings  on  their  shoulders  were  blowin 
on  long  trumpets  that  glittered  like  gold.  They  were  no 
actually  standing  on  the  platform,  but  were  mounted  o 
separate  pedestals,  which  could  not  however  be  seen,  sino 
they  were  completely  hidden  by  the  long  flowing  draperit 
of  the  robes.  Now,  as  the  pedestals  were  very  high,  some  c 
them  quite  six  feet  high,  these  women  looked  gigantic,  excep 
that  the  smallness  of  their  heads  spoiled  a  little  the  impressio 
of  size  and  their  loose  hair  looked  too  short  and  almost  absuri 
hanging  between  the  great  wings  and  framing  the 
faces.  To  avoid  monotony,  the  pedestals  were  of  all  size:| 
there  were  women  quite  low  down,  not  much  over  life-siz'j 
but  beside  them  others  soared  to  such  a  height  that  one  fel 
the  slightest  gust  of  wind  could  capsize  them.  And  all  thed 
women  were  blowing  their  trumpets. 

There  were  not  many  listeners.  Dwarfed  by  comparisoj 
with  these  great  figures,  some  ten  boys  were  walking  aboi 
before  the  platform  and  looking  up  at  the  women.  The  I 
called  each  other’s  attention  to  this  one  or  that,  but  seemd 
to  have  no  idea  of  entering  and  offering  their  services.  Onll 
one  older  man  was  to  be  seen;  he  stood  a  little  to  one  side.  HI 
had  brought  his  wife  with  him  and  a  child  in  a  perambulato  i 
The  wife  was  holding  the  perambulator  with  one  hand  am 
with  the  other  supporting  herself  on  her  husband’s  shoulde  \ 
They  were  clearly  admiring  the  spectacle  but  one  could  sd 
all  the  same  that  they  were  disappointed.  They  too  hai 
apparently  expected  to  find  some  sign  of  work,  and  th 
blowing  of  trumpets  confused  them.  Karl  was  in  the  sam: 
position.  He  walked  over  to  where  the  man  was  standing 
listened  for  a  little  to  the  trumpets,  and  then  said :  ‘Isn’t  th 
the  place  where  they  are  engaging  people  for  the  Theatre  d 
Oklahoma  ?  ’ 

‘I  thought  so  too/  said  the  man,  ‘but  we’ve  been  waitim 
here  for  an  hour  and  heard  nothing  but  these  trumpetJj 

248 


There’s  not  a  placard  to  be  seen,  no  announcers,  nobody 
anywhere  to  tell  you  what  to  do.' 

Karl  said:  ‘Perhaps  they're  waiting  until  more  people 
arrive.  There  are  really  very  few  here.' 

‘Possibly,’  said  the  man,  and  they  were  silent  again. 
Besides,  it  was  difficult  to  hear  anything  through  the  din  of 
the  trumpets.  But  then  the  woman  whispered  to  her  hus¬ 
band;  he  nodded  and  she  called  at  once  to  Karl:  ‘Couldn’t 
you  go  into  the  race-course  and  ask  where  the  workers  are 
being  taken  on  ?  ’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Karl:  ‘But  I  would  have  to  cross  the  platform, 
among  all  the  angels.’ 

‘Is  that  so  very  difficult?’  asked  the  woman. 

She  seemed  to  think  it  an  easy  path  for  Karl,  but  she  was 
unwilling  to  let  her  husband  go. 

‘All  right,’  said  Karl,  ‘I’ll  go.' 

‘That’s  very  good  of  you,’  said  the  woman,  and  both  she 
and  her  husband  took  Karl’s  hand  and  pressed  it. 

The  boys  all  came  rushing  up  to  get  a  near  view  of  Karl 
climbing  the  platform.  It  was  as  if  the  women  redoubled 
their  efforts  on  the  trumpets  as  a  greeting  to  the  first  appli¬ 
cant.  Those  whose  pedestals  Karl  had  to  pass  actually  took 
their  trumpets  from  their  mouths  and  leaned  over  to  follow 
him  with  their  eyes.  At  the  other  side  of  the  platform  Karl 
discovered  a  man  walking  restlessly  up  and  down,  obviously 
only  waiting  for  people  so  as  to  give  them  all  the  information 
they  might  desire.  Karl  was  just  about  to  accost  him,  when 
he  heard  someone  calling  his  name  above  hihi. 

‘Karl ! '  cried  an  angel.  Karl  looked  up  and  in  delighted 
surprise  began  to  laugh.  It  was  Fanny. 

‘Fanny  !  ’  he  exclaimed,  waving  his  hand. 

‘Come  up  here!’  cried  Fanny.  ‘You’re  surely  not  going 
to  pass  me  like  that !  ’  And  she  parted  her  draperies  so 
that  the  pedestal  and  a  little  ladder  heading  up  to  it  became 
Visible.  J 

‘Is  one  allowed  to  go  up  ?’  asked  Karl. 


A. -12 


249 


‘Who  can  forbid  us  to  shake  hands  V  cried  Fanny,  an 
she  looked  round  indignantly,  in  case  anyone  might  b 
coming  to  intervene.  But  Karl  was  already  running  up  th ; 
ladder. 

‘Not  so  fast !’  cried  Fanny.  ‘The  pedestal  and  both  of  u 
will  come  to  grief !’  But  nothing  happened,  Karl  reached  th| 
top  in  safety.  ‘Just  look/  said  Fanny,  after  they  had  greete: 
each  other,  ‘just  look  what  a  job  Fve  got/ 

‘It’s  a  fine  job/  said  Karl,  looking  round  him.  All  th 
women  near  by  had  noticed  him  and  begun  to  giggle.  ‘You're 
almost  the  highest  of  them  all/  said  Karl,  and  he  stretchej 
out  his  hand  to  measure  the  height  of  the  others. 

‘I  saw  you  at  once/  said  Fanny,  ‘as  soon  as  you  came  oil 
of  the  station,  but  Fm  in  the  last  row  here,  unfortunately 
nobody  can  see  me,  and  I  couldn’t  shout  either.  I  blew  s 
loudly  as  I  could,  but  you  didn’t  recognize  me/ 

‘You  all  play  very  badly/  said  Karl,  ‘let  me  have  a  turn: 
‘Why,  certainly/  said  Fanny,  handing  him  the  trumpej 
‘but  don’t  spoil  the  show  or  else  I’ll  get  the  sack/ 

Karl  began  to  blow  into  the  trumpet;  he  had  imagined 
was  a  roughly  fashioned  trumpet  intended  merely  to  make 
noise,  but  now  he  discovered  that  it  was  an  instrument  capab  * 
of  almost  any  refinement  of  expression.  If  all  the  instni 
ments  were  of  the  same  quality,  they  were  being  very  ill 
used.  Paying  no  attention  to  the  blaring  of  the  others  H 
played  with  all  the  power  of  his  lungs  an  air  which  he  hai 
once  heard  in  some  tavern  or  other.  He  felt  happy  at  havin: 
found  an  old  friend,  and  at  being  allowed  to  play  a  trumpet 
as  a  special  privilege,  and  at  the  thought  that  he  might  like!  I 
get  a  good  post  very  soon.  Many  of  the  women  stopped  pla^ 
ing  to  listen;  when  he  suddenly  broke  off  scarcely  half  e 
the  trumpets  were  in  action;  and  it  took  a  little  while  fc 
the  general  din  to  work  up  to  full  power  again. 

‘But  you  are  an  artist/  said  Fanny,  when  Karl  handed  he 
the  trumpet  again.  ‘Ask  to  be  taken  on  as  a  trumpeter/ 
‘Are  men  taken  on  for  it  too  ?  ’  said  Karl. 


250 


'Oh  yes/  said  Fanny.  'We  play  for  two  hours;  then  we're 
relieved  by  men  who  are  dressed  as  devils.  Half  of  them  blow, 
the  other  half  beat  on  drums.  It's  very  fine,  but  the  whole 
outfit  is  just  as  lavish.  Don’t  you  think  our  robes  are  beauti¬ 
ful?  And  the  wings?’  she  looked  down  at  herself. 

‘Do  you  think/  asked  Karl,  ‘that  I’ll  get  a  job  here  too?’ 

‘Most  certainly/  said  Fanny,  ‘why,  it’s  the  greatest  theatre 
in  the  world.  What  a  piece  of  luck  that  we’re  to  be  together 
again.  All  the  same  it  depends  on  what  job  you  get.  For  it 
would  be  quite  possible  for  us  not  to  see  each  other  at  all, 
even  though  we  were  both  engaged  here/ 

'Is  the  place  really  so  big  as  that  ?  ’  asked  Karl. 

'It’s  the  biggest  theatre  in  the  world/  Fanny  said  again, 
1  haven’t  seen  it  yet  myself,  I  admit,  but  some  of  the  other 
girls  here,  who  have  been  in  Oklahoma  already,  say  that  there 
are  almost  no  limits  to  it.’ 

‘But  there  aren’t  many  people  here/  said  Karl,  pointing 
dowm  at  the  boys  and  the  little  family. 

‘That’s  true/  said  Fanny.  ‘But  consider  that  we  pick  up 
people  in  all  the  towns,  that  our  recruiting  outfit  here  is 
always  on  the  road,  and  that  there  are  ever  so  many  of  these 
outfits.’ 

‘Why,  has  the  theatre  not  opened  yet?’  asked  Karl. 

‘Oh  yes/  said  Fanny,  ‘it’s  an  old  theatre,  but  it  is  always 
being  enlarged.’ 

‘I’m  surprised/  said  Karl,  ‘that  more  people  don’t  flock  to 
join  it. 

‘Yes,’  said  Fanny,  'it’s  extraordinary/ 

‘Perhaps/ .  said  Karl,  ‘this  display  of  angels  and  devils 
frightens  people  off  more  than  it  attracts  them.’ 

‘What  made  you  think  of  that?’  said  Fanny.  ‘But  you 
may  be  right.  Tell  that  to  our  leader;  perhaps  it  might  be 
helpful.’ 

‘Where  is  he  ?  ’  asked  Karl. 

'On  the  race-course,’  said  Fanny,  'on  the  umpire’s  plat¬ 
form/ 


251 


‘That  surprises  me  too,’  said  Karl,  ‘why  a  race-course  fo 
engaging  people?' 

4Oh/  said  Fanny,  ‘we  always  make  great  preparations  i 
case  there  should  be  a  great  crowd.  There's  lots  of  space  on 
race-course.  And  in  all  the  stands  where  the  bets  are  laid  o 
ordinary  days,  offices  are  set  up  to  sign  on  recruits.  Then 
must  be  two  hundred  different  offices  there.' 

‘But,'  cried  Karl,  ‘has  the  Theatre  of  Oklahoma  such 
huge  income  that  it  can  maintain  recruiting  establishmeni 
to  that  extent?' 

‘What  does  that  matter  to  us?’  said  Fanny.  ‘But  you' 
better  go  now,  Karl,  so  that  you  don’t  miss  anything;  and 
must  begin  to  blow  my  trumpet  again.  Do  your  best  to  get 
job  in  this  outfit,  and  come  and  tell  me  at  once.  Rememba 
that  I’ll  be  waiting  very  impatiently  for  the  news.' 

She  pressed  his  hand,  warned  him  to  be  cautious  in  climU 
ing  down,  set  the  trumpet  to  her  lips  again,  but  did  not  blov 
it  until  she  saw  Karl  safely  on  the  ground.  Karl  arranged  th 
robe  over  the  ladder  again,  as  it  had  been  before,  Fanni 
nodded  her  thanks  and  Karl,  still  considering  from  variou 
angles  what  he  had  just  heard,  approached  the  man,  who  ha  i 
already  seen  him  up  on  Fanny's  pedestal  and  had  come  closj 
to  it  to  wait  for  him. 

‘You  want  to  join  us?'  asked  the  man.  ‘I  am  the  stai 
manager  of  this  company  and  I  bid  you  welcome.’  He  had 
slight  permanent  stoop  as  if  out  of  politeness,  fidgeted  wit 
his  feet,  though  without  moving  from  the  spot,  and  playe ! 
with  his  watch  chain. 

‘Thank  you,'  said  Karl,  ‘I  read  the  placard  your  compan  i 
put  out  and  I  have  come  here  as  I  was  requested.' 

‘Quite  right,’  said  the  man  appreciatively.  ‘Unluckily  then 
aren't  many  who  do  the  same.’  It  occurred  to  Karl  that  h 
could  now  tell  the  man  that  perhaps  the  recruiting  com 
pany  failed  because  of  the  very  splendour  of  its  attractions 
But  he  did  not  say  so,  for  this  man  was  not  the  leader  of  th 
company,  and  besides  it  would  not  be  much  of  a  recommerj 

252 


dation  for  him  if  he  began  to  make  suggestions  for  the  im¬ 
provement  of  the  outfit  before  even  being  taken  on.  So  he 
merely  said :  There  is  another  man  waiting  out  there  who 
wants  to  report  here  too  and  simply  sent  me  on  ahead.  May 
I  fetch  him  now  ?  ’ 

‘Of  course/  said  the  man,  ‘the  more  the  better.’ 

‘He  has  a  wife  with  him  too  and  a  small  child  in  a  per¬ 
ambulator.  Are  they  to  come  too  ?  ’ 

‘Of  course/  said  the  man,  and  he  seemed  to  smile  at  Karl’s 

doubts.  ‘We  can  use  all  of  them/ 

Til  be  back  in  a  minute/  said  Karl,  and  he  ran  back  to 
the  edge  of  the  platform.  He  waved  to  the  married  couple  and 
shouted  that  everybody  could  come.  He  helped  the  man  to 
lift  the  perambulator  on  to  the  platform,  and  then  they  pro¬ 
ceeded  together.  The  boys,  seeing  this,  consulted  with  each 
other,  and  then,  their  hands  in  their  pockets,  hesitating  to  the 
last  instant,  slowly  climbed  on  to  the  platform  and  followed 
Karl  and  the  family.  Just  then  some  fresh  passengers  emerged 
from  the  underground  station  and  raised  their  arms  in 
astonishment  when  they  saw  the  platform  and  the  angels. 
However,  it  seemed  that  the  competition  for  jobs  would  now 
become  more  lively.  Karl  felt  very  glad  that  he  was  such  an 
early  arrival,-  perhaps  the  first  of  them  all;  the  married 
couple  were  apprehensive  and  asked  various  questions  as  to 
whether  great  demands  would  be  made  on  them.  Karl  told 
them  he  knew  nothing  definite  yet,  but  he  had  received  the 
impression  that  everyone  without  exception  would  be  en¬ 
gaged.  He  thought  they  could  feel  easy  in  their  minds.  The 
staff  manager  advanced  towards  them,  very  satisfied  that  so 
many  were  coming;  he  rubbed  his  hands,  greeted  everyone 
with  a  little  bow  and  arranged  them  all  in  a  row.  Karl  was 
the  first,  then  came  the  husband  and  wife,  and  after  that  the 
others.  When  they  were  all  ranged  up  -  the  boys  kept  jostling 
each  other  at  first  and  it  took  some  time  to  get  them  in  order 
-  the  staff  manager  said,  while  the  trumpets  fell  silent:  ‘I 
greet  you  in  the  name  of  the  Theatre  of  Oklahoma.  You 

253 


have  come  early/  (but  it  was  already  midday),  'there  is  no 
great  rush  yet,  so  that  the  formalities  necessary  for  engaging 
you  will  soon  be  settled.  Of  course  you  have  all  your  identifi¬ 
cation  papers/ 

The  boys  at  once  pulled  papers  out  of  their  pockets  and: 
flourished  them  at  the  staff  manager;  the  husband  nudged: 
his  wife,  who  pulled  out  a  whole  bundle  of  papers  from  unden 
the  blankets  of  the  perambulator.  But  Karl  had  none.  Would] 
that  prevent  him  from  being  taken  on?  He  knew  well  enough  | 
from  experience  that  with  a  little  resolution  it  should  be  easy^ 
to  get  round  such  regulations.  Very  likely  he  would  succeed. 
The  staff  manager  glanced  along  the  row,  assured  himself  that^ 
everyone  had  papers  and  since  Karl  also  stood  with  his  hand: 
raised,  though  it  was  empty,  he  assumed  that  in  his  case  too: 
everything  was  in  order. 

'Very  good/  said  the  staff  manager,  with  a  reassuring  wave: 
of  the  hand  to  the  boys,  who  wanted  to  have  their  papers 
examined  at  once,  ‘the  papers  will  now  be  scrutinized  in  the 
employment  bureaus.  As  you  will  have  seen  already  from  oun 
placard,  we  can  find  employment  for  everyone.  But  we  musn 
know  of  course  what  occupations  you  have  followed  until! 
now,  so  that  we  can  put  you  in  the  right  places  to  make  use 
of  your  knowledge/ 

'But  it's  a  theatre/  thought  Karl  dubiously,  and  he  listened] 
very  intently. 

'We  have  accordingly/  went  on  the  staff  manager,  ‘set  upi 
employment  bureaus  in  the  bookmakers’  booths,  an  office 
for  each  trade  or  profession.  So  each  of  you  will  now  tell  me 
his  occupation;  a  family  is  generally  registered  at  the  hus¬ 
band’s  employment  bureau.  I  shall  then  take  you  to  the 
offices,  where  first  your  papers  and  then  your  qualifications: 
will  be  checked  by  experts;  it  will  only  be  a  quite  short! 
examination;  there’s  nothing  to  be  afraid  of.  You  will  them 
be  signed  on  at  once  and  receive  your  further  instructions^ 
So  let  us  begin.  This  first  office  is  for  engineers,  as  the  in¬ 
scription  tells  you.  Is  there  perhaps  an  engineer  here?’ 

254 


Karl  stepped  forward.  He  thought  that  his  lack  of  papers 
made  it  imperative  for  him  to  rush  through  the  formalities 
with  all  possible  speed;  he  had  also  a  slight  justification  in 
putting  himself  forward,  for  he  had  once  wanted  to  be  an 
engineer.  But  when  the  boys  saw  Karl  reporting  himself  they 
grew  envious  and  put  up  their  hands  too,  all  of  them.  The 
staff  manager  rose  to  his  full  height  and  said  to  the  boys: 
'Are  you  engineers?’  Their  hands  slowly  wavered  and  sank, 
but  Karl  stuck  to  his  first  decision.  The  staff  manager  certain¬ 
ly  looked  at  him  with  -  incredulity,  for  Karl  seemed  too 
wretchedly  clad  and  also  too  young  to  be  an  engineer;  but  he 
said  nothing  further,  perhaps  out  of  gratitude  because  Karl, 
at  least  in  his.  opinion,  had  brought  the  applicants  in.  He 
simply  pointed  courteously  towards  the  office,  and  Karl 
went  across  to  it;  while  the  staff  manager  turned  to  the  others. 

In  the  bureau  for  engineers  two  gentlemen  were  sitting  at 
either  side  of  a  rectangular  counter  comparing  two  big  lists 
which  lay  before  them.  One  of  them  read  while  the  other 
made  a  mark  against  names  in  his  list.  When  Karl  appeared 
and  greeted  them,  they  laid  aside  the  list  at  once  and  brought 
out  two  great  books,  which  they  flung  open. 

One  of  them,  who  was  obviously  only  a  clerk,  said :  'Please 
give  me  your  identity  papers.’ 

T  am  sorry  to  say  I  haven’t  got  them  with  me/  said  Karl. 

'He  hasn’t  got  them  with  him,’  said  the  clerk  to  the  other 
gentleman,  at  once  writing  down  the  answer  in  his  book. 

Tou  are  an  engineer?’  thereupon  asked  the  other  man, 
who  seemed  to  be  in  charge  of  the  bureau.  ' 

'I’m  not  an  engineer  yet,’  said  Karl  quickly,  'but  - 

'Enough/  said  the  gentleman  still  more  quickly,  'in  that 
case  you  don’t  belong  to  us.  Be  so  good  as  to  note  the  in¬ 
scription.’  Karl  clenched  his  teeth,  and  the  gentleman  must 
have  observed  that,  for  he  said :  'There’s  no  need  to  worry. 
We  can  employ  everyone.’  And  he  made  a  sign  to  one  of  the 
attendants  who  were  lounging  about  idly  between  the  bar¬ 
riers  :  ‘Lead  this  gentleman  to  the  bureau  for  technicians/ 

255 


The  attendant  interpreted  the  command  literally  and  took 
Karl  by  the  hand.  They  passed  a  number  of  booths  on  either 
side;  in  one  Karl  saw  one  of  the  boys,  who  had  already  been 
signed  on  and  was  gratefully  shaking  hands  with  the  gentle¬ 
man  in  charge.  In  the  bureau  to  which  Karl  was  now  taken 
the  procedure  was  similar  to  that  in  the  first  office,  as  he  had 
foreseen.  Except  that  they  now  despatched  him  to  the  bureau 
for  intermediate  pupils,  when  they  heard  that  he  had  attended 
an  intermediate  school.  But  when  Karl  confessed  there  that 
it  was  a  European  school  he  had  attended,  the  officials  re¬ 
fused  to  accept  him  and  had  him  conducted  to  the  bureau 
for  European  intermediate  pupils.  It  was  a  booth  on  thci 
outer  verge  of  the  course,  not  only  smaller  but  also  humbleri 
than  all  the  others.  The  attendant  who  conducted  him  there 
was  furious  at  the  long  pilgrimage  and  the  repeated  rebuffs; 
for  which  in  his  opinion  Karl  alone  bore  the  blame.  He  did 
not  wait  for  the  questioning  to  begin,  but  went  away  at 
once.  So  this  bureau  was  probably  Karl’s  last  chance.  Whenr 
Karl  caught  sight  of  the  head  of  the  bureau,  he  was  almosti 
startled  at  his  close  resemblance  to  a  teacher  who  was  pre¬ 
sumably  still  teaching  in  the  school  at  home.  The  reseim 
blance,  however,  as  immediately  appeared,  was  confined  to 
certain  details;  but  the  spectacles  resting  on  the  man’s  broad 
nose,  the  fair  beard  as  carefully  tended  as  a  prize  exhibit,  thq 
slightly  rounded  back  and  the  unexpectedly  loud  abrupt! 
voice  held  Karl  in  amazement  for  some  time.  Fortunately,  hd 
had  not  to  attend  very  carefully,  for  the  procedure  here  wan 
much  simpler  than  in  the  other  offices.  A  note  was  certainly^ 
taken  of  the  fact  that  his  papers  were  lacking,  and  the  head  oi 
the  bureau  called  it  an  incomprehensible  piece  of  negligence; 
but  the  clerk,  who  seemed  to  have  the  upper  hand,  quickly 
glossed  it  over  and  after  a  few  brief  questions  by  his  superior1 
while  that  gentleman  was  just  preparing  to  put  some  more 
important  ones,  he  declared  that  Karl  had  been  engaged.  The 
head  of  the  bureau  turned  with  open  mouth  upon  his  clerk ; 
but  the  clerk  made  a  definite  gesture  with  his  hand,  said:: 

256 


Tineaged/  and  at  once  entered  the  decision  in  his  book.  Ob¬ 
viously  the  clerk  considered  a  European  intermediate  pupil  to 
be  something  so  ignominious  that  anyone  who  admitted  to 
bein£  one  was  not  worth  disbelieving.  Karl  for  his  part  had 
no  objection  to  this;  he  went  up  to  the  clerk  intending  to 
thank  him.  But  there  was  another  little  delay,  while  they 
asked  him  what  his  name  was.  He  did  not  reply  at  once;  he 
felt  shy  of  mentioning  his  own  name  and  letting  it  be  written 
down.  As  soon  as  he  had  a  place  here,  no  matter  how  small, 
and  filled  it  satisfactorily,  they  could  have  his  name,  but  not 
now;  he  had  concealed  it  too  long  to  give  it  away  now.  So  as 
no  other  name  occurred  to  him  at  the  moment,  he  gave  the 
nickname  he  had  had  in  his  last  post :  'Negro.’ 

'Negro?'  said  the  chief,  turning  his  head  and  making  a 
grimace,  as  if  Karl  had  now  touched  the  highwater  mark 
of  incredibility.  Even  the  clerk  looked  critically  at  Karl  for 
a  while,  but  then  he  said:  'Negro'  and  wrote  the  name 
down. 

'But  you  surely  haven't  written  down  Negro?’  his  chief 
shouted  at  him. 

'Yes,  Negro/  caid  the  clerk  calmly,  and  waved  his  hand,  as 
if  his  superior  should  now  continue  the  proceedings.  And  the 
head  of  the  bureau,  controlling  himself,  stood  up  and  said: 
Tou  are  engaged,  then,  for  the  -  ’  but  he  could  not  get  any 
further,  he  could  not  go  against  his  own  conscience,  so  he  sat 
down  and  said :  ‘He  isn’t  called  Negro.’ 

The  clerk  raised  his  eyebrows,  got  up  himself  and  said: 
‘Then  it  is  my  duty  to  inform  you  that -you  have  been  en¬ 
gaged  for  the  Theatre  in  Oklahoma  and  that  you  will  now 
be  introduced  to  our  leader.’ 

Another  attendant  was  summoned,  who  conducted  Karl 
to  the  umpire’s  platform. 

At  the  foot  of  the  steps  Karl  caught  sight  of  the  perambu¬ 
lator,  and  at  that  moment  the  father  and  mother  descended, 
the  mother  with  the  baby  on  her  arm. 

'Have  you  been  taken  on?’  asked  the  man;  he  was  much 

257 


more  lively  than  before,  and  his  wife  smiled  at  Karl  across 
her  shoulder.  When  Karl  answered  that  he  had  just  been 
taken  on  and  was  going  to  be  introduced,  the  man  said :  Then 
I  congratulate  you.  We  have  been  taken  on  too.  It  seems  to 
be  a  good  thing,  though  you  can’t  get  used  to  everything  all 
at  once;  but  it’s  like  that  everywhere.’ 

They  said  good-bye  to  each  other  again,  and  Karl  climbed 
up  to  the  platform.  He  took  his  time,  for  the  small  space  above 
seemed  to  be  crammed  with  people,  and  he  did  not  want  to  be 
importunate.  He  even  paused  for  a  while  and  gazed  at  thea 
great  race-course,  which  extended  on  every  side  to  distant 
woods.  He  was  filled  with  longing  to  see  a  horse-race;  hq 
had  found  no  opportunity  to  do  so  since  he  had  come  to 
America.  In  Europe  he  had  once  been  taken  to  a  race-meeting, 
as  a  small  child,  but  all  that  he  could  remember  was  that  he 
had  been  dragged  by  his  mother  through  throngs  of  people 
who  were  unwilling  to  make  room  and  let  him  pass.  So  that! 
actually  he  had  never  seen  a  race  yet.  Behind  him  a  mechan-t 
ism  of  some  kind  began  to  whir;  he  turned  round  and  saw. 
on  the  board,  where  the  names  of  the  winners  appeared,  the 
following  inscription  being  hoisted:  ‘The  merchant  Kalla] 
with  wife  and  child.’  So  the  names  of  those  who  were  engaged! 
was  communicated  to  all  the  offices  from  here. 

At  that  moment  several  gentlemen  with  pencils  and  note-  < 
books  in  their  hands  ran  down  the  stairs,  busily  talking  to; 
each  other;  Karl  squeezed  against  the  railing  to  let  them; 
pass,  and  then  went  up,  as  there  was  now  room  for  him  above. 
In  one  comer  of  the  platform  with  its  wooden  railing  -  the^ 
whole  looked  like  the  flat  roof  of  a  small  tower  -  a  gentleman  I 
was  sitting  with  his  arms  stretched  along  the  railing  and  ai 
broad  white  silk  sash  hanging  diagonally  across  his  chesti 
with  the  inscription:  ‘Leader  of  the  tenth  recruiting  squad 
of  the  Theatre  of  Oklahoma.’  On  the  table  stood  a  telephone*! 
doubtless  installed  for  use  during  the  races  but  now  obviously] 
employed  in  giving  the  leader  all  necessary  information  re¬ 
garding  the  various  applicants  before  they  were  introducedj 

258  . 


for  he  did  not  begin  by  putting  questions  to  Karl,  but  said  to  a 
gentleman  sitting  beside  him  with  crossed  legs,  his  chin  in  his 
hands:  ‘Negro,  a  European  intermediate  pupil/  And  as  if 
with  that  he  had  nothing  more  to  say  to  Karl,  who  was 
bowing  low  before  him,  he  glanced  down  the  stairs  to  see 
whether  anyone  else  was  coming.  As  no  one  came,  he  lent  an 
ear  to  the  conversation  which  the  other  gentleman  was 
having  with  Karl,  but  for  the  most  part  kept  looking  at  the 
race-course  and  tapping  on  the  railing  with  his  fingers.  These 
delicate  and  yet  powerful,  long  and  nimble  fingers  attracted 
Karl’s  attention  from  time  to  time,  although  he  should  really 
have  been  giving  his  whole  mind  to  the  other  gentleman. 

Tou’ve  been  out  of  work?’  this  gentleman  began  by  ask¬ 
ing.  The  question,  like  almost  all  the  other  questions  he 
asked,  was  very  simple  and  direct,  nor  did  he  check  Karl’s 
replies  by  cross-examining  him  at  all;  yet  the  way  in  which 
he  rounded  his  eyes  while  he  uttered  his  questions,  the  way 
in  which  he  leaned  forward  to  contemplate  their  effect,  the 
way  in  which  he  let  his  head  sink  to  his  chest  while  he 
listened  to  the  replies,  in  some  cases  repeating  them  aloud, 
invested  his  inquiries  with  an  air  of  special  significance, 
which  one  might  not  understand  but  which  it  made  one  un¬ 
easy  to  suspect.  Many  times  Karl  felt  impelled  to  take  back 
the  answer  he  had  given  and  substitute  another  which 
might  find  more  approval,  but  he  always  managed  to  refrain, 
for  he  knew  what  a  bad  impression  such  shilly-shallying  was 
bound  to  make,  and  how  little  he  really  understood  for  the 
most  part  the  effect  of  his  answers.  Besides,  his  engagement 
seemed  to  be  already  decided  upon,  and  the  consciousness  of 
that  gave  him  support. 

To  the  question  whether  he  had  been  out  of  work  he  re¬ 
plied  with  a  simple  ‘Yes.’ 

‘Where  were  you  engaged  last?’  the  gentleman  asked  next. 

Karl  was  just  about  to  answer,  when  the  gentleman  raised 
his  first  finger  and  repeated  again :  ‘Last !  ’ 

As  Karl  had  understood  the  question  perfectly  well,  he 

259 


involuntarily  shook  his  head  to  reject  the  confusing 
additional  remark  and  answered :  ‘In  an  office/ 

This  was  the  truth,  but  if  the  gentleman  should  demand 
more  definite  information  regarding  the  kind  of  office,  he 
would  have  to  tell  lies.  However,  the  necessity  did  not  arise, 
for  the  gentleman  asked  a  question  which  it  was  quite  easy  to 
answer  with  perfect  truth:  ‘Were  you  satisfied  there?' 

‘No ! '  exclaimed  Karl,  almost  before  the  question  was^ 
finished.  Out  of  the  corner  of  his  eye  he  could  see  that  the 
leader  was  smiling  faintly.  He  regretted  the  impetuosity  ofi 
his  exclamation,  but  it  was  too  tempting  to  launch  that  no,  fon 
during  all  his  last  term  of  service  his  greatest  wish  had  been  i 
that  some  outside  employer  of  labour  might  come  in  and  ask 
him  that  very  question.  Still,  his  negative  might  put  him  ati 
another  disadvantage  if  the  gentleman  were  to  follow  it  up 
by  asking  why  he  had  not  been  satisfied?  But  he  asked  in¬ 
stead  :  ‘For  what  kind  of  post  do  you  feel  you  are  best  suited?' 
This  question  might  contain  a  real  trap,  for  why  was  it  put  at!] 
all  since  he  had  already  been  engaged  as  an  actor? 
But  although  he  saw  the  difficulty,  he  could  not  bring  him-  ' 
self  to  say  that  he  felt  particularly  suited  for  the  acting  ; 
profession.  So  he  evaded  the  question  and  said,  at  the  risk  j 
of  appearing  obstructive:  ‘I  read  the  placard  in  the  town,, 
and  as  it  said  there  that  you  could  employ  anyone,  I  came 
here.' 

‘We  know  that/  said  the  gentleman,  showing  by  his  en¬ 
suing,  silence  that  he  insisted  on  an  answer  to  the  question. 

‘I  have  been  engaged  as  an  actor/  said  Karl,  hesitantly,  to  < 
let  the  gentleman  see  that  he  found  himself  in  a  dilemma. 

‘Quite  so,'  said  the  gentleman,  and  fell  silent  again. 

‘No,’  said  Karl,  and  all  his  hopes  of  being  settled  in  a  job 
began  to  totter.  ‘I  don't  know  whether  I’m  capable  of  being 
an  actor.  But  I  shall  do  my  best  and  try  to  carry  out  all  my 
instructions.’ 

The  gentleman  turned  to  the  leader,  both  of  them  nodded; 
Karl  seemed  to  have  given  the  right  answer,  so  he  took 

260 


courage  again  and  standing  erect  waited  for  the  next  question. 
It  ran:  ‘What  did  you  want  to  study  originally?’ 

To  define  the  question  more  exactly  -  the  gentleman 
seemed  to  lay  great  weight  on  exact  definition  -  he  added: 
Tn  Europe,  I  mean,’  at  the  same  time  removing  his  hand  from 
his  chin  and  waving  it  slightly  as  if  to  indicate  both  how 
remote  Europe  was  and  how  unimportant  were  any  plans  that 
might  have  been  made  there. 

Karl  said :  T  wanted  to  be  an  engineer.’  This  answer  almost 
stuck  in  his  throat;  it  was  absurd  of  him,  knowing  as  he  did 
the  kind  of  career  he  had  had  in  America,  to  bring  up  the  old 
day-dream  of  having  wanted  to  be  an  engineer  -  would  he 
ever  have  become  an  engineer  even  in  Europe?  -  but  he 
simply  did  not  know  what  other  answer  to  make  and  so  gave 
this  one. 

Yet  the  gentleman  took  it  seriously,  as  he  took  everything 
seriously.  ‘Well,  you  can’t  turn  into  an  engineer  all  at  once,’ 
he  said,  ‘but  perhaps  it  would  suit  you  for  the  time  being 
to  be  attached  to  some  minor  technical  work.’ 

‘Certainly,’  said  Karl.  He  was  perfectly  satisfied;  true,  if 
he  accepted  the  offer,  he  would  be  transferred  from  the  acting 
profession  to  the  lower  status  of  technical  labourer,  but  he 
really  believed  that  he  would  be  able  to  do  more  justice  to 
himself  at  technical  work.  Besides,  he  kept  on  telling  himself, 
it  was*  not  so  much  a  matter  of  the  kind  of  work  as  of  estab¬ 
lishing  oneself  permanently  somewhere. 

‘Are  you  strong  enough  for  heavy  work?’  asked  the 
gentleman. 

‘Oh  yes,’  said  Karl. 

At  that,  the  gentleman  asked  Karl  to  come  nearer  and  felt 
his  arm. 

‘He’s  a  strong  lad,’  he  said  then,  pulling  Karl  by  the  arm 
towards  the  leader.  The  leader  nodded  smilingly,  reached 
Karl  his  hand  without  changing  his  lazy  posture,  and  said: 
Then  that’s  all  settled.  In  Oklahoma  we’ll  look  into  it  again. 
See  that  you  do  honour  to  our  recruiting  squad  1  ’ 


261 


Karl  made  his  bow,  and  also  turned  to  say  good-bye  to  the 
other  gentleman,  but  he,  as  if  his  functions  were  now  dis¬ 
charged,  was  walking  up  and  down  the  platform  gazing  at 
the  sky.  As  Karl  went  down  the  steps  the  announcement 
board  beside  them  was  showing  the  inscription:  ‘Negro, 
technical  worker/ 

As  everything  here  was  taking  an  orderly  course,  Karl  felt 
that  after  all  he  would  not  have  minded  seeing  his  real  name 
on  the  board.  The  organization  was  indeed  scrupulously 
precise,  for  at  the  foot  of  the  steps  Karl  found  a  waiting 
attendant  who  fastened  a  band  round  his  arm.  When  Karl 
lifted  his  arm  to  see  what  was  written  on  the  band,  there, 
right  enough,  were  the  words  ‘technical  worker’. 

But  wherever  he  was  to  be  taken  now,  he  decided  that  he 
must  first  report  to  Fanny  how  well  everything  had  gone. 
To  his  great  sorrow  he  learned  from  the  attendant  that  both 
the  angels  and  the  devils  had  already  left  for  the  next  town 
on  the  recruiting  squad’s  itinerary,  to  act  as  advance  agents 
for  the  arrival  of  the  troop  next  day.  ‘What  a  pity/  said  Karl; 
it  was  the  first  disappointment  that  he  had  had  in  this  new 
undertaking,  ‘I  had  a  friend  among  the  angels/ 

‘You’ll  see  her  again  in  Oklahoma/  said  the  attendant, 
‘but  now  come  along;  you’re  the  last/ 

He  led  Karl  along  the  inner  side  of  the  platform  on  which 
the  angels  had  been  posted;  there  was  nothing  left  but  the  i 
empty  pedestals.  Yet  Karl’s  assumption  that  if  the  trumpet¬ 
ing  were  stopped  more  people  would  be  encouraged  to  apply 
was  proved  wrong,  for  there  were  now  no  grown-up  people  l 
at  all  before  the  platform,  only  a  few  children  fighting  overl 
a  long,  white  feather  which  had  apparently  fallen  out  of  an  i 
angel’s  wing.  A  boy  was  holding  it  up  in  the  air,  while  the  I 
other  children  were  trying  to  push  down  his  head  with  one} 
hand  and  reach  for  the  feather  with  the  other. 

Karl  pointed  out  the  children,  but  the  attendant  said  I 
without  looking :  ‘Come  on,  hurry  up,  it’s  taken  a  long  time] 
for  you  to  get  engaged.  I  suppose  they  weren’t  sure  of  you?’ 1 

262 


*1  don’t  know/  said  Karl  in  astonishment,  but  he  did  not 
believe  it.  Always,  even  in  the  most  unambiguous  circum¬ 
stances,  someone  could  be  found  to  take  pleasure  in  suggest¬ 
ing  troubles  to  his  fellow-men.  But  at  the  friendly  aspect  of 
the  Grand  Stand  which  they  were  now  approaching,  Karl 
soon  forgot  the  attendant’s  remark.  For  on  this  stand  there 
was  a  long  wide  bench  covered  with  a  white  cloth;  all  the 
applicants  who  had  been  taken  on  sat  on  the  bench  below  it 
with  their  backs  to  the  race-course  and  were  being  fed.  They 
were  all  happy  and  excited;  just  as  Karl,  coming  last,  quietly 
took  his  seat  several  of  them  were  rising  with  upraised 
glasses,  and  one  of  them  toasted  the  leader  of  the  tenth 
recruiting  squad,  whom  he  called  the  ‘father  of  all  the  un¬ 
employed’.  Someone  then  remarked  that  the  leader  could  be 
seen  from  here;  and  actually  the  umpire’s  platform  with  the 
two  gentlemen  on  it  was  visible  at  no  very  great  distance. 
Now  they  were  all  raising  their  glasses  in  that  direction, 
Karl  too  seized  the  glass  standing  in  front  of  him,  but  loudly 
as  they  shouted  and  hard  as  they  tried  to  draw  attention  to 
themselves,  there  was  no  sign  on  the  umpire’s  platform  that 
the  ovation  had  been  observed  or  at  least  that  there  was  any 
wish  to  observe  it.  The  leader  lounged  in  his  comer  as  before, 
and  the  other  gentleman  stood  beside  him,  resting  his  chin 
on  his  hand.  Somewhat  disappointed,  everybody  sat  down 
again;  ’here  and  there  one  would  turn  round  towards  the 
umpire’s  platform  again;  but  soon  they  were  all  well  occupied 
with  the  abundant  food;  huge  birds  such  as  Karl  had  never 
seen  before  were  carried  round  with  many  forks  sticking  into 
the  crisply,  roasted  meat;  the  glasses  were  kept  filled  with 
wine  by  the  attendants  -  you  hardly  noticed  it,  you  were 
busy  with  your  plate  and  a  stream  of  red  wine  simply  fell 
into  your  glass  -  and  those  who  did  not  want  to  take  part  in 
the  general  conversation  could  look  at  views  of  the  Theatre 
of  Oklahoma  which  lay  in  a  pile  aUone  end  of  the  table  and 
were  supposed  to  pass  from  hand  to  hand.  But  few  of  the 
people  troubled  much  about  the  views,  and  so  it  happened 

263 


that  only  one  of  them  reached  Karl,  who  was  the  last  in  the 
row.  Yet  to  judge  from  that  picture,  all  the  rest  must  have 
been  well  worth  seeing.  The  picture  showed  the  box  reserved 
in  the  Theatre  for  the  President  of  the  United  States.  At 
first  glance  one  might  have  thought  that  it  was  not  a  stage- 
box  but  the  stage  itself,  so  far-flung  was  the  sweep  of  its: 
breastwork.  This  breastwork  was  made  entirely  of  gold,  tc 
the  smallest  detail.  Between  its  slender  columns,  as  delicately 
carved  as  if  cut  out  by  a  fine  pair  of  scissors,  medallions  of 
former  Presidents  were  arrayed  side  by  side;  one  of  these  had 
a  remarkably  straight  nose,  curling  lips  and  a  downward¬ 
looking  eye  hooded  beneath  a  full,  rounded  eye-lid.  Rays  of 
light  fell  into  the  box  from  all  sides  and  from  the  roof;  the 
foreground  was  literally  bathed  in  light,  white  but  soft,  while 
the  recess  of  the  background,  behind  red  damask  curtains- 
falling  in  changing  folds  from  roof  to  floor  and  looped  with 
cords,  appeared  like  a  duskily  glowing  empty  cavern.  One 
could  scarcely  imagine  human  figures  in  that  box,  so  royal 
did  it  look.  Karl  was  not  quite  rapt  away  from  his  dinner; 
but  he  laid  the  photograph  beside  his  plate  and  sat  gazing  at 
it.  He  would  have  been  glad  to  look  at  even  one  of  the  other 
photographs,  but  he  did  not  want  to  rise  and  pick  one  up 
himself,  since  an  attendant  had  his  hand  resting  on  the  pile 
and  the  sequence  probably  had  to  be  kept  unbroken;  so  ha 
only  craned  his  neck  to  survey  the  table,  trying  to  make  out| 
if  another  photograph  were  being  passed  along.  To  his  great 
amazement  -  it  seemed  at  first  incredible  -  he  recognized] 
among  those  most  intent  upon  their  plates  a  face  which  ha 
knew  well:  Giacomo.  At  once  he  rose  and  hastened  up  td 
him.  'Giacomo  !  ’  he  cried. 

Shy  as  ever  when  taken  by  surprise,  Giacomo  got  up  from] 
his  seat,  turned  round  in  the  narrow  space  between  the 
benches,  wiped  his  mouth  with  his  hand  and  then  showecJ 
great  delight  at  seeing  Karl,  suggesting  that  Karl  shoulc 
come  and  sit  beside  him,  or  he  should  change  his  own  place! 
instead;  they  had  a  lot  to  tell  each  other  and  should  stid! 

264 


together  all  the  time.  Karl,  not  wanting  to  disturb  the  others, 
said  perhaps  they  had  better  keep  their  own  places  for  the 
time  being,  the  meal  would  soon  be  finished  and  then  of 
course  they  would  stick  together.  But  Karl  still  lingered  a 
moment  or  two,  only  for  the  sake  of  looking  at  Giacomo. 
'What  memories  of  the  past  were  recalled !  What  had  hap¬ 
pened  to  the  Manageress?  What  was  Therese  doing? 
Giacomo  himself  had  hardly  changed  at  all  in  appearance; 
the  Manageress’s  prophecy  that  in  six  months’  time  he  would 
develop  into  a  large-boned  American  had  not  been  fulfilled; 
he  was  as  delicate-looking  as  before,  his  cheeks  hollow  as 
ever,  though  at  the  moment  they  were  bulging  with  an  extra 
large  mouthful  of  meat  from  which  he  was  slowly  extracting 
the  bones,  to  lay  them  on  his  plate.  As  Karl  could  see  from 
his  arm-band,  he  was  not  engaged  as  an  actor  either,  but  as  a 
lift-boy;  the  Theatre  of  Oklahoma  really  did  seem  to  have 
a  place  for  everyone  !  But  Karl’s  absorption  in  Giacomo  had 
kept  him  too  long  away  from  his  own  seat,  fust  as  he  was 
thinking  of  getting  back,  the  staff  manager  arrived,  climbed 
on  to  one  of  the  upper  benches,  clapped  his  hands  and  made 
a  short  speech  while  most  of  the  people  rose  to  their  feet, 
those  who  remained  in  their  seats,  unwilling  to  leave  their 
dinners,  being  nudged  by  the  others  until  they  too  were 
forced  to  rise. 

1  hope,’  said  the  staff  manager,  Karl  meanwhile  having 
tip-toed  back  to  his  place,  ‘that  you  have  been  satisfied  with 
our  reception  of  you  and  the  dinner  we  have  given  you.  The 
recruiting  squad  is  generally  supposed  to  keep  a  good  kitchen. 
I’m  sorry  we  must  clear  the  table  already,  but  the  train  for 
Oklahoma  is  going  to  leave  in  five  minutes.  It’s  a  long  jour¬ 
ney,  I  know,  but  you’ll  find  yourselves  well  looked  after. 
Let  me  now  introduce  the  gentleman  in  charge  of  your 
transport  arrangements,  whose  instructions  you  will  please 
follow.’ 

A  lean  little  man  scrambled  up  on  the  bench  beside  the 
staff  manager  and,  scarcely  taking  time  to  make  a  hasty  bow, 

265 


began  waving  his  arms  nervously  to  direct  them  how  to 
assemble  themselves  in  an  orderly  manner  and  proceed  to 
the  station.  But  he  was  at  first  ignored,  for  the  man  who  had 
made  a  speech  at  the  beginning  of  the  dinner  now  struck 
the  table  with  his  hand  and  began  to  return  thanks  in  aj 
lengthy  oration,  although  -  Karl  was  growing  quite  uneasy] 
about  it  -  he  had  just  been  told  that  the  train  was  leavind 
in  five  minutes.  He  was  not  even  deterred  by  the  patent | 
inattention  of  the  staff  manager,  who  was  giving  variou>| 
instructions  to  the  transport  official;  he  built  up  his  oration 
in  the  grand  manner,  mentioning  each  dish  that  had  been] 
served  and  passing  a  judgement  on  each  individually,  wind-J 
ing  up  with  the  declaration :  ‘Gentlemen,  that  is  the  way  td 
our  hearts  !’  Everyone  laughed  except  the  gentlemen  he  wa*j 
addressing,  but  there  was  more  truth  than  jest  in  his  state¬ 
ment,  all  the  same. 

This  oration  brought  its  own  penalty,  since  the  road  td 
the  station  had  now  to  be  taken  at  a  run.  Still,  that  was  nd 
great  hardship,  for  -  as  Karl  only  now  remarked  -  no  onq 
carried  any  luggage;  the  only  thing  that  could  be  called 
luggage  was  the  perambulator,  which  the  father  was  pushind 
at  the  head  of  the  troop  and  which  jolted  up  and  down| 
wildly  as  if  no  hand  were  steadying  it.  What  destitute,  dis-j 
reputable  characters  were  here  assembled,  and  yet  how  wel]| 
they  had  been  received  and  cared  for !  And  the  transport 
official  must  have  been  told  to  cherish  them  like  the  apple  oil 
his  eye.  Now  he  was  taking  a  turn  at  pushing  the  peram¬ 
bulator,  waving  one  hand  to  encourage  the  troop;  now  hq 
was  urging  on  stragglers  in  the  rear;  now  he  was  careering 
along  the  ranks,  keeping  an  eye  on  the  slower  runners  in  the^ 
middle  and  trying  to  show  them  with  swinging  arms  howl 
to  run  more  easily. 

When  they  reached  the  station  the  train  was  ready  fori 
departure.  People  in  the  station  pointed  out  the  new-comers 
to  each  other,  and  one  heard  exclamations  such  as:  ‘All 
these  belong  to  the  Theatre  of  Oklahoma  V  The  theatre^ 

266 


seemed  to  be  much  better  known  than  Karl  had  assumed;  of 
course,  he  had  never  taken  much  interest  in  theatrical  affairs. 
A  whole  carriage  was  specially  reserved  for  their  troop;  the 
transport  official  worked  harder  than  the  guard  at  getting  the 
people  into  it.  Only  when  he  had  inspected  each  compart¬ 
ment  and  made  a  few  rearrangements  did  he  get  into  his  own 
seat.  Karl  had  happened  to  get  a  window-seat,  with  Giacomo 
beside  him.  So  there  they  sat,  the  two  of  them,  close  together, 
rejoicing  In  their  hearts  over  the  journey.  Such  a  carefree 
journey  in  America  they  had  never  known.  When  the  train 
began  to  move  out  of  the  station  they  waved  from  the  win¬ 
dow,  to  the  amusement  of  the  young  men  opposite,  who 
nudged  each  other  and  laughed. 

For  two  days  and  two  nights  they  journeyed  on.  Only  now 
did  Karl  understand  how  huge  America  was.  Unweariedly 
he  gazed  out  of  the  window,  and  Giacomo  persisted  in 
struggling  for  a  place  beside  him  until  the  other  occupants  of 
the  compartment,  who  wanted  to  play  cards,  got  tired  of  him 
and  voluntarily  surrendered  the  other  window-seat.  Karl 
thanked  them  -  Giacomo’s  English  was  not  easy  for  anyone 
to  follow  -  and  in  the  course  of  time,  as  is  inevitable  among 
fellow-travellers,  they  grew  much  more  friendly,  although 
their  friendliness  was  sometimes  a  nuisance,  as  for  example 
whenever  they  ducked  down  to  rescue  a  card  fallen  on  the 
floor,  they  could  not  resist  giving  hearty  tweaks  to  Karl’s 
legs  or  Giacomo’s.  Whenever  that  happened  Giacomo  always 
shrieked  in  renewed  surprise  and  drew  his  legs  up;  Karl 
attempted  once  to  give  a  kick  in  return,  but  suffered  the  rest 
of  the  time  in  silence.  Everything  that  went  on  in  the  little 
compartment,  which  was  thick  with  cigarette-smoke  in  spite 
of  the  open  window,  faded  into  comparative  insignificance 
before  the  grandeur  of  the  scene  outside. 

*  The  first  day  they  travelled  through  a  high  range  of 
mountains.  Masses  of  blue-black  rqck  rose  in  sheer  wedges 
to  the  railway  line;  even  craning  one’s  neck  out  of  the 
window,  one  could  not  see  their  summits;  narrow,  gloomy, 

267 


jagged  valleys  opened  out  and  one  tried  to  follow  with  ai 
pointing  finger  the  direction  in  which  they  lost  themselves; 
broad  mountain  streams  appeared,  rolling  in  great  waves 
down  on  to  the  foot-hills  and  drawing  with  them  a  thousand 
foaming  wavelets,  plunging  underneath  the  bridges  over 
which  the  train  rushed;  and  they  were  so  near  that  the  breath  I 
of  coldness  rising  from  them  chilled  the  skin  of  one's  face.