“All the News 
That's Fit to Print”’ 


Entered as ass 
Postoffice, New York, 


AFTER EXPLOSIONS RIPPED 


Matter. 
N. Y. 


VOL. XCV..No. 32,239. 


WARSHP BLOWS UP | 
AT MUNITIONS PIR, 
INPORT, KILLING § 


60 on Escort Vessel Injured 
—Biasts Shake New Jersey 
Towns Near Big Depot 


tt 
¥ 


BOMBS ASHORE SET OFF! ge 


Sailor Is Only Slightly Hurt 
as Depth Charge Explodes 
as He Is Carrying It 


By MEYER BERGER 
Special to Twa New Yoru Trees 

LEONARDO, N. J., April 30— 
One officer and four sailors of the 
destroyer escort Solar’s comple- 
ment of fourteen officers and 136 
enlisted men vanished utteriy be- 
fore noon today in an ammunition 
explosion that tore away one-third 
of the 306-foot ship’s forward 
structure. 

About sixty of the ship’s crew 
were injured, but only thirty-five 
were hospitalized, and of them 
only a handful remained tonight 
for further treatment. The Navy) 
withheld the names of the five! 
missing men end the names of the 
injured because not all their fam- 
ilies had been officially notified. 


The explosion happened as the/Petrijio Plans to Prolong the 
Solar's crew was unloading her J 
Refusal of Union Men to 


ra 


DESTROYER 


The New Work Gimes. 


Copyrigtt, 146, by The New York Times Company, 
NEW YORK, WEDNESDAY, MAY I, 1946. 


ESCOR 


a of 


* 
* 
#-¢ 
: * 


ry 


’ 
ee 9 
{ 


The wrecked U. 8. 8, Solar at the Navy Ammunition Depot im Earie, N. J., yesterday 


The New York Times (U. 5. Navy) 


BAN BY MUSICIANS ‘Stalin Warns of War Plot 
BLOW 10 TELEVISION) By “International Reaction’ 


By The Associated Press. 
LONDON, April 30—Generalissimo Stalin promised tonight! the Ministers agreed to invite the|time to study it. One must keep|report than any other. 


that the Soviet Union would be true to a policy of peace and se-| Yugoslav and Ital:an Governments|in mind that the members of the 


AUSTRIA'S- DEMAND 
FOR SOUTH TYROL 


Paris Conference Rejects Any 
Major Frontier Revision in 
That Region of Italy 


NO PROGRESS ON TRIESTE 


Rome and Beigrade Are Asked 
to Send Delegates—-Report 
of Experts Confusing 


By C. L. SULZBERGER 

By Cable 10 Tas New Youu Tres. 
PARIS, April 30—Italy’s reten- 
tion of most of the Province of 


LATE C 


Genrtse today, 4 


ITY EDITION 


Partly cloudy and mild today. 
Occasional showers tomorrow. 


Temperatures Y esterdey—Max., 64; Mis, 41 


A. My Senet, 101 FL M. 


Full 0. 6. Weather Barena Report, Page #1 


THREE CENTS ew idx are 


* PIGPOURRULEOUT JOINT PALESTINE BODY BARS 


A JEWISH STATE, BUT URGES 
ENTRY OF 100,000 REFUGEES 


Arabs ‘Outraged’ by Report; 
Jews Are Far From Satisfied 


Rival Agencies Reiterate Their Arguments 
—U. S., British Talks Are Forecast on 
Easing Burden Too Big for London 
By HERBERT L. MATTHEWS 


By Wireless to Tas New Youn Torus. 
LONDON, April 30—Now that happy about the proposal to allow 


Bolzano (South Tyrol}, which 1/the report of the Anglo-American|100,000 Jewish refugees to enter 
claimed by Austria, was virtually|committee of Inquiry on Palestine|Palestine but asserted that with- 
aasured tonight after the Council/nay been published, one can safely|out the formation of « Jewish 
of Foreign Ministers had agreed) predict tonight that the next step|state there could be no solution to 
that no requests for e major fron-|will be for the British to consult|the problem of homeless Jews. 
tier change would be accepted init.¢ United States Government| On all sides one hears dubious 
that area so valugble in hydro-|,pout it. The British have reached|comment about the fact that the 
electric power. the point at which they consider|/committee'’s report makes no sug- 
At the same time, after examin-\that Palestine is far too great &! gestion in terms of any sort of fi- 
ing a verbose and confused report/burden for them to be forced tonality nor does it even offer any 
on Trieste and Venezia Giulia, sub-|handls alone. kind of long-term solution to the 
mitted at long last by the special) No Government spokesman|Palestinian problem. It is feared 
commission sent by the Foreigniwould say anything about the/that even moderate elements 
Ministers’ deputies to investigate/renort tonight because the Cabinet|among the Arabs will be more dis- 
the Italizn-Yugoslav border are&.jand other officials have not had/turbed about that feature of the 


In their present mood of shocked 


TRUMAN FOR ACTION 


Inquiry Upholds His Visa 
Proposal, Urges End 
of White Paper 


WOULD GUARD ARAB RIGHTS 


Report for Change in Holy Land 
Property Curbs—Demands 
a Firm Stand on Violence 


The text of the report 

of the Anglo-American 

ommittee of Inquiry 

| on Palestine, Pages 15 
| to 21, inclusive. 


| 

FELIX BELAIR JR. 

Special to Tus New Yous Tame, 

| WASHINGTON, April 50—The 
Anglo-American Committee of In- 


curity but charged that what he described as “international reac-|© 8¢"4 delegates here on Friday\committee had a mandate only to! disgust over the murder of seven 


in their views 4 
to present once again the make recommendations, which do|pritish soldiers in Tel Aviv last lquiry on problems of J in Bue 


t and vital! i. 
on this hotly disputed an Yinot in any sense involve Govern-|Thursday the British are jaclined| one and Palestine, reporting to 


ammunition supply in preparation 
the Industry indefinitely 
important region. mental responsibility. to place the most prominence on! 1). two Governments today on its 


for an -werhaul. Normally she tion” was “hatching plans of a new war.” In an order of the day 
sendealebea 


carries about fifteen tons of as- broadcast by the Moscow radio? —~—-——- -———— 


sorted ammunition, including depth 


the Russian leader also declared 


bombs and smaller charges, tor- 
pedoes and shells for her cannon. 
Only one-third of this amount was 
still aboard when the biast oc- 


ne to work in televisi til 
" work in television until some 
“oe of Explosives Near By jindefinite date in the future when 
Near by, when the detonation|the union can determine the effects 
shook the New Jersey coast in and/of video's advent on present-day 
around the Raritan Bay district,| radio, it was learned yesterday. connection with the Soviet Union's 
were a number of other vessels! ‘oejevision broadcasters were May Day celebration, was heard in 
preparing to unload ammunition. agreed that Mr. Petrillo’s stand|London by the Soviet mottitor, who 
It was unofficially estimated here| would retard the immediate devel-|issued the following téxtr™ 
that these vessels held, all told.|onment of video programs, since} Comrades, Red Army and Red 
about 25,000 tons of expiosives.|it could be a matter of monthe if} Navy men, sergeants and petty 
Tugs dragged these craft out of not years before anyone could de-| officers, comrade officers, gener- 
Pm ae preren termine to what extent television| als and admirals, working people 
Bolas, hurled at tromenious foree|"os Svetnas OF templernent) Ot Hee Boxset Osien! 

’ sound broadcasting. y, for’ the first time since 
against freight cars on the pier, Use of. “live” musicians was the victorious termination of the 
started other explosions. One carlrrst denied the television industry Great Patriotic War we celebrate, 
in a freight string, fil'ed chiefly|,,, February, 1945, by the interna- May 1—the internationai holiday 
with depth charges, blew up and all sina) eneeatine eout of the fed- of working people—in conditions 
but vanished in dust and smoke, eration, but yesterday was the of peaceful life, won in a hard 
scattering its parts in all direc- first sinee that Mr Petrill struggle against the enemies at 
tions. Three strings of cars were! : vdicatea| (re Ccomt Of heavy sacrifices and 
hauled sho plained the action and indicated) privations, 

. reward by their loco- that the ban would be of prolonged! ‘ o 
motive crews, at great risk. duration me year ege the Reg Army 


No one seemed certain tonight hoisted the banner of victory over 
what had caused the explosion, but| Musical Films Already Banned | Berlin and completed the defeat 


what seemed like a possible ex-| Last week Mr, Petrillo’s union of fascist Germany, Within four 
planation came from Jack Horne,|4"d the Hollywood motion picture ore 10 jo tage a penned wy 52 
fireman second class, of Charlotte,| Producers entered into an agree- many Ssimontadiet enhe enor" 
N. C. He thought a piece of am-|ment not to permit films contain- her endg The ponte World 
munition carried by Joseph Stu- ing music to be used in television, War, prepared by the forces of 
chinski, seaman, of Baltimore,|@ move leaving the telecasters) international reaction and un- 
might have done it. with only records as a possible) jeashed by the chief fascist 

“Ski,” the fireman said, “was source of music. Beginning July; states, ended in a full victory of 
carrying a ‘hedgehog’ from the for-|1, under a rule of the Federal) the freedom-loving nations, The 
ward magazine. While he was|Communications Commission, the) smashup and liquidation of the 
holding it, it just went off. He/television stations are scheduled to| main hotbeds of fascism and 
must have bumped it against some-|offer twenty-eight hours of pro-| world aggression resulted in 
thing, because these things go off|grams a week, but under Mr. Pe-| changes in the political life of 
when anything touche: them.” trillo’s edicts they will be forced 


By JACK GOULD 
The American Federation of Mu- 
jsicians, headed by James C. Pe-|the apple of one’s eye the armed| 
trillo, plans to forbid its members| forces and defensive power of 


|that it was necessary to be con- 


TEXT OF STALIN ORDER 





the nations of the world, in a 


Seaman Stuchinskl,  oddly/to rely primarily on talks, sporting} Wide growth of the democratic 
enough, was not seriously injured./events and other non-musica]) ™ovement of the nations. 
He was deafened, a few minor| fare, Taught by the experience of | 





stantly vigilant, “to protect as| 


our country.” | 


His broadcast order, issued in| 


scratches showed on his chest when | war, the popular masses realized 
he got to the first-aid station and 
his dungarees were split. 

“It wert off. The thing just 
went off,” he said. 

The “hedgehog” Stuchinski car- 
ried was an anti-submarine depth 
charge. Metal-cased, weighing 
about sixty pounds, it is generally 
cylindrical, about thirty inches| 
long and between four and five) 
inches in diameter. 

Bow Like Elephant’s Trunk 

The Solar lay at the northern, | 
or bay end, of the easternmost of | 
the three great piers that jut out) 
from the Navy's Earle Ammunition 
Depot, when she blew up. She was 
approximately one and one-half 
miles from the beach end of the 
depot. The blast curled her bow 
in much the same shape as an ele- 
phant’s back-bent trunk. 

The concussion was felt twenty 
to thirty miles around, The det- 
onation rushed across Raritan Bay 
to shake homes in Tottenville, Rich- 
mond Vailey, Pleasant Plains, Prin- 
cess Bay, Great Kills, Oakwood | 
and New Dorp, all on Staten Island, 
and shattered panes in some of 
those communities. 

Ground tremors were felt to aa 


| 





west and to the southwest. There 
were same freakish effects. Resi- 
dents in Middletown Township, in- 
cluding Rumson, Fair Haven, Red 
Bank and Little Silver, for example, 
seemed certain the explosion was) 
local. Several frightened house-i 
wives called the police to say, “The 
boiler just blew up in my cellar.” 
Dogs raced away from the beach 


Continued on Page 2, Column 8 


i 


LITHOGRAPHIC SUPERINTENDENT — must 
eve practical experience in color work in the 
folowing departments: Litho Art—Det Etch 
Piate Matine—Stripping. Plant located out of 
tewn. Will omly comsider applicants who have 
experience and ability to earn $16,000 a 

! of more Give complete details as to beck- 


Ce casas Bl ee tae = 
, a 


Coincidentally with stating the 
union's position on television, Mr. 
Petrillo also reiterated his stand 
against permitting standard radio 
programs containing music to be 
presented simultaneously on fre- 
quency modulation outlets. The 
union is insisting on double crews 
of musicians in the event of such 
duplication, 

The re-statement of the union's 
views on FM were regarded with 


Continued on Page 28, Column 2 


Sharp’ Restrictions in Distilling 


Ordered in F 


that the destinies of atates cannot 
be entrusted to reactionary lead- 
ers, who pursue the narrow caste 
and selfish anti-popular aims. It 
is for this reason that nations, 
which no longer wish to live in 
the old way, take destinies of 
their states into their own hands, 
establish democratic order and 
actively fight against the forces 
of reaction, against instigators of 
@ new war. The nations of the 


Continued on Page 5, Column 4 


j 


ood Conservation 


By CHARLES E. EGAN 


WASHINGTON, April 30—World 
famine ig more than a short term 
problem, and plans to meet its 
reappearance next winter should 
be drafted immediately, Chester C 
Davis, chairman of the President's 
Special Famine Emergency Com- 


|mittee, asserted today. 


Mr. Davis, who conferred with 
President Truman, later said that 


emergency measures, taken to in-| 


sure larger relief shipment of 
grains and other foods to famine- 
stricken areas in the next few 
weeks, could not be considered as 
final,” but were merely “the first 
sprint” in a continuing race to 
avert death for millions who oth- 
erwise would starve. 

Meanwhile, Secretary Anderson 
issued an order restricting distil- 
leries who operated for five days 
at full mashing capacity in April 
to three capacity days in May. 

The order also limited the use 
of grain by the entire distilling 
industry to 2,500,000 bushels a 
month; banned use of wheat in the 


Special to Tus New Youn Times 


manufacture of spirits and re- 
stricted distillers to the use of corn 
which is unsuitable for human con- 
sumption, 

In January, distillers were per- 
mitted ten capacity mashing days, 
but were cut to seven and one- 
|half in February and to five days 
jin March and April. 

Brewers, operating on a 30 per| 
}cent reduction of grain, were not 
included 4n today’s order. 

“Every report coming before us 
makes it plain that the present 
famine is not a short run emer- 
gency that ends on July 1,” Mr. 
Davis’ statement said, adding: 

“The present food shortages 
have been seriously aggravated by 
drought in many parts of the 
world, but even with good weather 
the wartime destruction of agri- 
cultural facilities will be felt for 
a long time. 

“Farm animals and farm ma- 
chinery have been destroyed. The 
strength of farm workers has 


Page 22, Column 2 
4 


| 


Continugd on 


INQUIRY FINDS PERIL 
10 SECRETS OF WAR 


Senators Hear Radar Makers 
on Russian Buying and 
Urge Law Tightening 


By ©. P, TRUSSELL 

Special to Tee New York Times. 
WASHINGTON, April 30-—Need 
for a tightening of the laws to pro- 
vide protection for wartinie secrets 
in the electronics and other fields 


was declared by Senate investiga-| Minister socalled tint the Potsdam tives authorizing the admission 
tors today to be “very definite.” decisions, the bible” under which of T00,000 European Jews into 


The statement came after a 
closed-session inquiry into negotia- 
tions for sales of radar and similar 
equipment to Russia. 

Members of a special Senate Ju- 
diciary subcommittee, conducting 
the investigation, said that there 
was no evidence that “classified,” 


Continued on Page %, Column 4 


—— eS 


World News 


The report showed a complete 
divergence in opinion between the 
|Soviet investigator and the three 
lother participants on the value of 
la census taken in 1945 by a Yugo- 
slay, Professor Rodlich. The So- 
viet member of the commission 
said the census was fine and the 
three others said it was just the 
opposite. Since this census is of 
vital importance in deciding the 
ethnic basis for a decision, that 
leaves everything up in the alr, 


Suggested by Molotov 


The move to widen the scope of 
the Foreign Ministers’ meeting by 


The Arab Office in London has/that part of the report dealing with 
lost no time in issuing a scorching |security and with making it clear 
statement condemning the report)that violence and terrorism will be 
lock, stock and barrel. The Jewish resolutely repressed. The state- 


Agency for Palestine gave the re- om adie 
port a mixed reception. It was| Continued on Page 14, Column 5 


Ss 


Truman Said to Plan Start 
Of Jewish Entry ‘Forthwith’ 


By LAWRENCE RESNER 
Bartley C. Crum, one of the six United States members of 


\four-month investigation, urged 
ithe admission of 100,000 European 
|Jews into the Holy Land as soon 
‘as possible, but flatly rejected the 
idea of a Jewish state, together 
with Arab claims for dominance, 
It asserted Christendom’'s own in- 
terest in the area, 

Released simultaneously for pub- 
lication In Washington and Lon- 
don, the report drew from Preai- 
dent Truman an expression of sat- 
isfaction that his proposal for the 
admission of 100,000 Jews into 
Palestine had been recommended. 
|He added that “the transference of 


inviting in the Italians and Yugo-|the Joint Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry on Palestine,|these unfortunate people should 


slave was suggested by Vyacheslav 
M. Molotov. The Soviet Foreign 


the peace treaties are being draft- 
ed, provided that the interested 
parties should be included when 
necessary. Thus, the doors have 
been opened to permit entry of 
‘those deleggtions——-Greek, Italian, 
\Yugosiav, Hungarian and Bul- 
garian—now clamoring for a 


Continued on Page 4, Column 2 


Summarized 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946 


Palestine should become neither 
a Jewish state nor an Arab 
state, the Anglo-American Com- 
mittee of Inquiry declared in its 
report made public sifnultaneous- 
ly last night in Washington and 
London. Admission of 100,000 
Jews this year and virtual abro- 
gation of the 1939 British White 
Paper with its restrictions on 
land holdings were recommended. 
Other suggestions included con- 
tinuation of the present mandate 
until establishment of a United 
Nations trusteeship and resolute 
suppression of violence and ter- 
rorism by Jews or Arabs. [1:8.] 

Although President Truman ex- 
pressed pleasure over certain 
parts of the report, it was felt 
in Washington that neither the 
Jews nor Arabs would be sat- 
isfied. [13.1.] In fact, Arab 
leaders threatened to combat any 
additional Jewish immigration 
[13:3] and Zionists expressed 
their opposition. Bartley C. 
Crum, a member of the commit- 
tee, predicted that a directive 
authorizing the entry of 100,000 
Jews into Palestine would “issue 
forthwith.” [1:6-7.] . 

British reaction counted heav- 
ily upon American support in 
whatever was done, but regretted 
the absence of any long-term 
solution. [1:6-7.] 

Italy will be permitted to re- 
tain most of southern Tyrol de- 
spite Austrian claims, the For- 
eign Ministers tentatively agreed 
at their conference in Paris, but 
they were as wide apart as ever 
on what to do about Trieste and 
the Venezia Giulia area. It was 
decided to invite Yugoslavia and 
Italy to present their cases 
anew. [1:5.] 

Britain tried to meet French de- 
sires by suggesting internation- 
alization of either the Ruhr or 
both the Ruhr and the left bank 
of the Rhine for fifty years. 
{3:1.] Secretary Byrnes’ pro- 
posed four-power treaty to keep 
Germany disarmed was favor- 
ably received in the Senate For- 
eign Affairs Committee. [3:8.] 

The United Nations Security 


Council subcommittee opens its 
investigation into Franco Spain 
this afternoon. [1:7.] Europe's 
ruined industries should be re- 
stored before attempts to eradi- 
cate world unemployment, the 
Economic and Employment Com- 
mission heard [8:5], while the 
Transport and Communications 
Commission debated the relative 
merits of free enterprise and 
government control of shipping. 
(7:1.] The Commission on Hu- 
man Rights may seek a new in- 
ternational bill of rights and esk 
authority to supervise its imple- 
mentation. [8:2.] 

Tabriz, capital of Azerbaijan, 
has been formally evacuated by 
Russian troops, the Tabriz radio 
reported. [3:6.] Premier Stalin 
declared that, while the world 
must remain vigilant against re- 
action, it had “no reasen to 
doubt” that Russia would re- 
main steadfast in her devotion 
to international peace and secu- 
rity. (1:3-4.] 

Japan was shocked at the plot 
to assassinate General MacAr- 
thur and ‘he Government offered 
its apologies. No arrests have 
been announced, [1:6-7.] 

Ammunition being unloaded 
from the destroyer-escort Solar 
in Raritan Bay exploded, killing 
an officer and four sailors. [1:1.] 

John L. Lewis served notice 
that anthracite miners intended 
to strike on May 31 unless they 
obtained the same demands that 
led to the soft-coal strike. Nego- 
tiations will start in New York 
on May 10. No progress was 
made toward settling the bitu- 
minous dispute. [29:1.] 

Further restrictions were 
placed on the use of grain by 
distillers in order to make more 
food available for world famine 
relief. [1:2-3.] 

General Motors was authorized 
by the OPA to raise prices on 
its cars from $16 to $60 to cover 
wage increases. [27:6-7.] House 
members returned to Washing- 
ton still opposed to extending 
price control without heavy re- 
strictions. [30:5.] 


predicted here yesterday, on the basis of a discussion he had with 
President Truman at the White House on Monday, that the direc- 


UN'S SPAIN INOUIR| 


Palestine would “issue forth- 


with.” 

Mr, Crum, a San Francisco law- 
yer, also expressed the belief that 
most Jewish groups would endorse 
the affirmative aspects of the re- 


COMMENCES TODAY 


to rontinue a fight for the achieve- 5-Man Subcommittee to Meet 
ment of their ideological tenets, ME ; 
sstnateaiaas hesaaaiatn Here In Secret—No Outside 
An immediate endorsement of} Witnesses at First Session 
the recommendation to obtain the 
admission of the 100,000 European 
Jews came from Joseph M. Pros- 


—_—————s 


By W. H. LAWRENCE 


kauer, president of the American; The Franco regime in Spain goes| 


Jewish Committee, who said thejon trial today on charges that it 
provisions for immediate action/is a cause of international friction 
were “obviously based on the high-jand a threat to world peace. 
est considerations of statesmanship| Meeting privately at 3 P. 
jand humanity.” representatives of Australia, China, 

The World Zionist Emergency|France, Poland and Brazil will set 
Council, which speaks for some of|in motion the first formal! investi- 
the largest and most active Zion-|gation by the United Nations, 
ist groups in the United States,/authorized Monday by a 10-to-0 


|now be accomplished with the 
greatest dispatch.” 
| The President declared ft signif- 
icant that the report almed at 
guarantees for Arab civil and re- 
ligious rights and urged measures 
|to improve Arab cultural, educa- 
/tional and economic position, 
Land Changes Asked 

“IT am also pleased,” he sald, 
“that the committee recommenda, 
in effect, the abrogation of the 
\White Paper of 1939.” 
| The report repudiated the 1939 
White Paper principles, which 
| made further Jewish immigration 
dependent on Arab consent and 
| banned Jewish land purchases in 
|a major part of Palestine. 

Dependent for its final effect on 
| adoption by both Governments, the 
report covered a wide range of 
controversial subjects on which 
|President Truman gave no hint of 
his attitude except to say that he 
was taking them under advise- 
| ment. 

However, Mr. Truman seemed 
to have embraced the major policy 


said a statement outlining its po-|vote of the Security Council, in 
sition probably would be issued to-|which Russia did not participate/a)) the exclusive claims of Jews 
day, after the report had been/but refrained from exercising 4M\ and Arabs to Palestine,” which the 
| studied. asserted right to veto the inquiry.| committee enunciated as follows: 

The initial negative response by| How, where and when the Coun-| «(1 That Jew shall not dominate 
a Jewish group came from the Po-|cil subcommittee will function pre-| arab and Arab shall not doriinate 
litical Action Committee for Pal-|sumably will be decided in the! jow in Palestine, (II) That Pales- 
estine, whose executive vice chair-|early part of today’s meeting, and tine shall be neither a Jewish state 
man, Dr. Baruch Korff, said that/the members then will turn to an-|nor an Arab state. (III) That the 
despite “the report's few finejalyzing the evidence now before! form of government ultimately to 


statement rejecting “once and for 





points, the commission had proved|them, listing the specific charges 


Continued on Page 13, Column 4 | Continned on Page 7, Column 6 


MacArthur Plot Diteii Taito 
They See Possible Repercussions 


By The Associated Press. 

TOKYO, April 30—News of Japanese reporters speculated that 
a frustrated assassination plot/they discussed tighter precautions 
against General Douglas Mac-|than previously were planned for 
Arthur tonight shocked the Japa-|the May Day demonstrations. 
nese. Many Japanese immediately 

Their first reaction was two-|asked, “Will this create more anti- 
fold: A feeling that their country|Japanese feeling in America?” 
had lost face; fears that repefcus-| They linked this with fear that ad- 
sions might be felt in every house-|verse American reaction might 
hold. complicate efforts to obtain food 

The Government officially apolo-jand might mean a longer, harsher 
gized. Katsuo Okazaki, represent-/ occupation. 
ing Foreign Minister Shigeru Yo-| They also expressed regret that 
shida, visited General MacArthur's! the incident might mar the occupa- 
office two hours after Allied Head-|tion and change the attitude of 
quarters had announced discovery|General MacArthur, whom the 
of the plot. He did not see the gen-| Japanese generally respect. 
eral personally, but delivered @/ jtied headquarters had previ- 
verbal measage to aides. ously given some details of the 

Mr. Okazaki expressed “deep re-!nict. One conspirator was seized 
gret and concern” end said hisiang @ nation-wide hunt was 
Government was “greatly embar-|jaunched for a die-hard Japanese 
rassed.” He asked if there was/militarist named as the arch- 
anything his Government could do. | piotter. 

Earlier, Premier Kijuro Shide-/ The accused and hunted” plot 
hara, Mr. Yoshida and Home Min-|ieager was Hideo Tokayama, for- 
ister_Chuzo_ Mitsuchi conferred. mer member of the dread Kempei- 


ree AN eh — 
fe." S8i Auth ave, New York—adve 2 "| Continued on Page 12, Column 6 


* > 


In the - 


be established shall, under interna. 
tional guarantees, fully protect and 
|preserve the interests in the Holy 
Land of Christendom and of the 


| Moslem and Jewish faiths.” 
Stress on Unique Stetus 


| With deliberate emphasis, the 
Committee of Inquiry declared that 
“Palestine is a Holy Land, sacred 
to Christian, to Jew and to Moslem 
alike; and because it is @ holy 
land, Palestine is not, and can 
never become, a iand which any 
race or religion can justly elaim as 
its very own.” 

With equal emphasis, the com 
mittee said the same considerations 
set Palestine apart from other 
lands, and dedicated it to the pre 
cepts and practices of the brother- 
hood of man rather than to those 
of narrow nationa*‘am. 

The 42,000-word report was 
signed in Lausanne, Switzerland, 
by Judge Joseph C. Hutcheson, 
United States chairman, Sir John 
E. Singleton, British chairman, 
Frank Aydelotte, Frank W. Bux- 
ton, Bartley C. Crum, James G, 
McDonald and Wiillam Phillipa, 
American members, and W, F, 
Crick, R. H, 8. Crossman, Fred- 
erick Leggett, R. E. Manningham. 
Buller and M. Morrison for Britain. 
For the immediate future the 
Continued on Page 14, Column 2 
ae. 


| _ cimnet Jewel 
Bway &4 @ 





NO 
GASTRONOMICAL 


GAPS 
ON 


LONGCHAMPS 
MENU 


From taste-tingling cock- 
tails to a delectable 
dessert, whatever your 
choice may be, you will 
be more than thrilled and 
delighted by a selection 
from Longchamps’ menu. 


EXTRA 
QUALITY AND 
FLAVOR ARE 


YOURS 
TOC ENJCY 


with the variety and 
freshness of Longchamps’ 
mouth-watering foods. 


aT ALL TWELVE 


SUIT... 


ceslike a qood movig, 
has had cartful cutting 


1420 BROADWAY sect 4818 


- OA goes plece lo bag a good suit™ | 


.: H siles, from below decks to topside.!on the 


Sti ville, Ky., was in the hold passing 
pa the hedge-hogs with Michael Mans- 


on WGA. 
gon S007, 


12:30 p.m. 


MONDAY through SATURDAY 


SUOSCSCHSOKCeSEeSeEeeeseseseeEeS 


Sal 
Lebster Tails 
Whitefish 
Rainbew Trewut 
Curries L’indienne 
Fierdia Pompano 


and Mis Royal Fomthy af Fish 
Your Mest, ADOLPM FLASHNER 
3rd Ave., near S3rd St. 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


|SKIPPER ACCLATMS 
~ HEROISM OF CREW 


‘Men Went Into the Teeth of 
Fire’ on the Solar to Fight 
It, Says Comdr. La Rocque 


ee ae 


’ » 2 
se ee al 


SCHACHT PACIFIST, 


Special (o Tax New Yora Trees. 


NATIONAL AIRPORT AID) 20 22 $120; 
APPROVED BY SENATE p=. 


lietrator, 50 per cent on the besis 
lof population and the remainder 


than $100,000,000 in any one 
construction pur- 
the money to be allocated 
the States by the admin- 


WASHINGTON, April 30—Con- on the basis of area. 


HE TELLS TRIBUNAL 


German Financier Denies He | program aun @ eatheneh al  de-| 
Plotted War, Gives Lie to [velopment program was completed 


today when the Senate approved) 
American Envoys 49 to 32 a compromise measure. 


The bill carries appropriations | 
of $523,000,000 which, according to) 
ite critics, will for the first time 


AMERICAN HEADS ORDER 


Father Clement Appointed te 
Lead Capuchin Monks 


By Wireless to Tes New Yoru Tues. 


Special to Tas New Yoru Tues 

LEONARDO, N. J., April 30—| = 
|Grim, blackened,  hollow-eyed 
crewmen, who had seen and) 
cheated death aboard the ill-fated| 
U.S.8. Solar, straggled back to the 
/headquarters of the naval ammu- 
nition depot here today and told 
in tired voices of how tragedy and 
comedy enveloped them. 

Lieut. Comdr. G. R. La Roeque 
of Kankakee, Ili, the Solar’s 27- 
year-old skipper, who was burned 
on the face and hands, spoke 
quietly of the heroism o7 his en- 
listed men as he stood looking out 
to sea in the tattered and smudged 
remnants of hia smart tans. 

“Those sailors were wonderful,” 
skipper said. “God, they were 
brave men. Believe me, I saw a lot 
of brave sailors. I couldn't begin 
to put into words what those men 
did. It was wonderful, On the! 
starboard side and on the port) 
side, they went into the teeth of | 
the fire to fight it.” | 
(| Commander La Rocque said! 
there were a series of explosions; 
the first one of good size; the sec- 
ond, somewhat smaller, and the! 
third blowing up the whole bow. | 
The last explosion, the skipper! 
seid, lifted one of the Solar’s guns 
and deposited it on top of another 
sore distance away. The skipper 
said the first blast enabled all in 
the forward mess hall, including 
~ petty officers, to clear out in| 
me, 


RED CROSS SPEEDY 


Wartime Plans Put to Use for 
First Time to Rush Aid to 
Explosion Victims 


- — 


Plans outlined in wartime, bu 
‘never before put to use, enabled 
Saved by Circumstance ‘the Disaster Relief Committee of 
Chief Soundman Edward Dan-|the Monmouth Chapter of the 
iels, 26, of Mt. Orab, Ohio, credit-| American Red Cross to speed two 
caring’ hie life on wall as thase a¢| Pte crams mumues anda field dires- 
one of 
all other chief petty officers. Dan-|*°" Yesterday to the scene of the 
iels said the chiefs were eating in| °*Plosion of the U.8.8. Solar with- 
the general mess hall inste of in fifteen minutes after the last 
the chief petty officer’s mess to-|of three blasts had rocked the 
jday because A. R. Bone of Rich-| area. 
jmond, Va., the chief's mess cook,| The» emergency brought into ac- 


had injured his hand eariier in the : 
day. The petty officer's mess is di- tion 300 trained Red Cross work 
rectly over the hold that was de-|°™ of all kinds, many of whom 
molished. | worked all day and on through the 





mag 

azine when I heard the first blast,” | 

Daniels said. “When the second | “ 
jbiast went off, I saw flames com- 
ing out of the magazine. I saw one 
body blown over the side, but he 
didn't sink and his feet were sick- 
jing out of the water. I started to 


jabandon ship when the third biast| ood 
iblew me half-way across the ship. | Personnel Gamer eyipment and 


in Shrewsbury, N. J. 
rougnout the day cars, trucks, 
station wagons, ambulances and 
| the chapter’s canteen mobile kitch- 
en shuttled back and forth be- 
tween Shrewsbury and the depot 
cerrying blood plasma, relief sup- 


Ri Parte ited a et” st 
aes Saoabatiat. 


A fireboat playing streams of water into the burning U. S. S. Solar 


‘The New York Times (VU. 8. Coast Guard) 


Navy rescue workers, soaked with oil, on the pier of the Earle 
Depot after working te save men aboard the vessel. 


the New Jersey State Board of 
Health. The Red Cross chapter at 
Trenton at once sent the units on 


Associated Press Wirephote 


speedily to the depot Rospital at 
Earle. 
One hour after the explosion two 


By RAYMOND DANIELL 
By Wireless to Tus New Youa Trane. 


NUREMBERG, Germany, April 
30—Hjalmar Schacht made his did 
from the witness stand today to he 


in the country’s history peovide| ROME, April 30—The Pope has 
virtually direct Federa] assistance appointed Father Clement, Pro- 
to cities in the development of \yincial Superior of the Capuchins 

ee owe of the New York Archdiocese, to 
remembered in history as a patri-/ure was succeed Father Donato, a Belgian, 


Senator Mo- 
otic German cedeabee teiltemam arta ade aametenes es Minister General of the Ca- 
he is accused of|the House-Senate com ‘ Order for six years, 
Senator Saltonstall of Massachu- today. 
before the Inter-/setts attacked the bill as setting « 


Tribunal, he de-|bad preceden porting an ef-|Clement Neubauer of Milwaukee, 
ee danctad metevher at Maine|arrived here last week. The Ca- 
ise measure.|puchin Order, which, according to 
They concentrated their attack |the latest figures, includes 12,914 
ions which erable the|monks, thus becomes the second 
utics Administrator to great Roman Catholic order to be 
funds for mu-| headed by an American in a short 
time. Father Valentine Schaaf 
to be appro-/of Cincinnati was ee Minis- 
000,000 will be avail-|ter General of Franacisces 
1953 in amounts of not! Minor Brothers last autumn. 


, / f / 3 [ \ [SH / ¢ ) 
eg 
{ py . 
} tC SHALL LTS 


men,” was notoriously . 
misunderstanding, he said. At one 

time, Schacht testified, the For- 

eign Office urged Mr. Dodd to/fP 7 F 
bring « stenographer with him|) SAps 
when .he called so that he could|| * ford 
have a record of his own state-\)) Baa 
|mente in the event of future dis-// ames 
jagreement over what had been | 3aau 
jaaid. wa ate 

| Schacht made one statement|) Je) 
with legal implications affecting|)} = 7) 
most of the twenty other defend-|| “.9) 
ants, Asserting that the constitu-|)  ~ 

tion of the Weimar Republic had 

| never been abrogated by the Nazis,| ——__—_— 
|he declared that the efforts by the 

defense to shift responsibility to/ 

|Hitler under the Fuehrer-prinzip! 

were without a legal basis. All! 


| 
is 


to Leonardo. 
Twelve more units were picked 
by a member of the Monmoath 


grabbed for a lifeline and low- 
| Plasma, Morphine Urgent 


ered myself to the dock.” 
Machinist's Mate, 3c, Frank! The first and most urgent call 
Iezzi, 25, of Philadelphia, joined|from the base was for blood plas-|u 
three other shipmates, Richard|ma and morphine syrettes.. A tel- Motor Corps at the Monmouth 
Pergler, E. A. Wolkonowski, and ephone message to North Atlantic|Memorial Hospital in Long 
Melvin Joschko, in given warm Area Headquarters in New York) Branch. The hospital also supplied 
praise to the Chief Boatswain's located ainety-six units of the/all its available morphine syrettes 
ate, whom they knew only as former in Trenton, where they had/ and all the 4x4 sterilized bandages 
Norman, for his devotion to duty.) been stored at Crescent Temple by it could spare. All were delivered 
The last time they saw Norman, —— 
they confessed, he was at his sta- 
jon fighting the mushrooming 
flames. Similar praise waa given 
|to Lieut. (jg) H. Worrell, the chief 
engineering officer who was serv- 
ing as officer of the day. 


WARSHIP BLOWS UP! 


Dog Last to Quit Ship; 
Mascot Wet bat Unhart 


Special to Tus New Youu Tins 


| aboard after the explosion fires 


truck loads of food were sent over|members of the Cabinet, and he! 
the eight-mile route to the depot.|included himself, were legally re- 
By late afternoon officials of the| sponsible for their acts, he said,| 
disaster committee estimated that/although Hitler, through a reign 
they had dispatched twenty gallons of terror, had perhaps been able 
of coffee, twenty gallons of milk,|to force them to commit acts 
600 sandwiches and a large number against their conscience. 
of cakes. More calls for food were) During the banker's interroga- 
expected. tion, His lawyer, Dr. Rudolph Dix, 

= asked for a clarification of the 
charges against him. Justice Rob- 
ert H. Jackson, the chief American 
were out and poked in the debris| prosecutor, replied that, although 
for the ship's safe. Tomorrow was Schacht had been indicted only for 
to have been pay day for the crew 4ssisting in the plot to wage wars 
and he was to have distributed, °f *sgression, the prosecution held 


°m hard 


Then you. are welcome here. 


to fit’ 


Many of 


D’Andrea’s customers came to us years 


] Pilgrims, a collection of notabies 


) rive 


———— | meetings between a British For-|juries. Much the same 


Among First Survivors 


Nineteen-year-old Joschko, a 
machinist’s mate, was one of the 
firat survivors to leave the ship. 
When he hit :@he deck end‘ qas in hysterical rush, ears twitching, 
taken in hand by first aid men, the’ tails between their legs. Cars 
first man he saw was Walter Seav- Stopped on Highways 85 and 36 on 
lers, a pharmacist’s mate, 3c, and the New Jersey shore route and 
‘boyhood school chum from La-| motorists got out to inquire about 
Porte, Ind., whom he had not seen “the earthquake.” The damage, 
in four or five years. however, was confined pretty much 

Some insight into the series of|to the Solar and to structures on 
events leading up to the first era|""t pier. 


Continued From Page 1 





plosion was given by the members| jeut. Comdr. G. R. LaRocque of 
of a five-man ammunition team! Kankakee, Ill., Bronze Star holder 
which was passing up hedge-\who saw thirteen engagements in 
hopping, or anti-submarine mis-|\the Pacific, was outside his cabin 
Solar’s port side, watchin 

|his crew at the unloading at 11:3 

|A. M., when the first biast oc- 


ded like a th 
field to Paul Polemeni, 21, of 380|{nen shell exploding in’ the star 


‘Sackett Street, Brooklyn; tacnard| board fo 


Maynard Spurlock, 20, of Louis- 


loding in the star- 
magazine. 

One third of the crew wag at 
mess on the second deck. They 
— ,,|and most of the other men aboard 
| “I was passing this equipment,” swarmed to the fire stations. 
Stuchinski said, “when it suddenly | Within less than a minute a sec- 
jexploded. I saw a guy go to pieces 
jand I don’t remember how I got 
out, but I got out.” 


“Cheesecake” Miller of Washing: 
|ton, and — Stuchinski, 23, o* 
Baltimore, Md. 


ward magazine shook the craft. 
Commander LaRocque gave 
The bulk of the crew of the Solar,|order, “Abandon ship!” 
it was said, are ready to be dis-| Several of the crew nearest the 
charged from the service in about | magazine had already suffered 
a month. A crewman carrying ®/burns. Many were blinded by fuel 
isheaf of records told some of his),;) sprayed into their faces by the 
companions they were payroll'biast. All who could see, though, 
records. The men grinned gle¢-| manned the ship's hose and direct- 
fully. Tomorrow they get paid. ed streams toward the burning 
bow. On shore the disaster sirens 
screamed and disaster units roared 
toward the piers. 

At 11:38 A. M. the third, and 
iby far the greatest, blast deafened 
the DE’s crew, tore away her 

PR p.|bridge and all her forward struc- 

LONDON, April 30—New trib-\tire and a giant cloud, black at 
utes were paid to the retiring the bottom and dull gray where it 
American Ambassador, John G.|/mushroomed at the top, twisted 


LAST TRIBUTES-PAID 
TO WINANT IN LONDON 


s|' Winant, tonight on the occasion of and snaked toward the clear, sun- 


| .|it sky. This blast seemed to blow 
his last public appearance in Brit eut the flame that shot through 
jaan. the smoke of the earlier explo- 
At a dinner of the Society of/giong. 
It tore the ship from her hawsers 
and shot her back, southward, al- 
moat 300 y 
end. Civilians and Navy personnel 
‘on the concrete pier cowered under 
(man whom Viscount Greenwood), rain of nuts, bolts, steel and iron 
called the “equal of any otherifragments, slivered glass and 
|American Ambassador if not the/great gun shields from the Solar 
| greatest of them all.” The honors|that screamed past them. Pow- 
|were shared by Lord Inverchapel,/dered metal dust covered their 
|\formerly Sir Archibald Clark Kerr,/heads and shoulders, 
| Ambassador-designate to the Unit-| Fifty to sixty men of the crew 
ed States, and W. Averell Harri-jhad leaped from the Solar’s Gecks 
man, the new American Ambassa-|to the pier when the skipper called 
|dor to Britain. The Earl of Hali-)“Aban on ship!” but few of the 
fax was expected but did not ar-;men still aboard realized that the 
in time. Foreign Secretary' DE had been blown back 300 yards 
Ernest Bevin, six other Cabinet/from her original ition whpn 
| Ministers and a large number of/they, too, recove from shock 
leading peers and former Ministers/and lea to the concrete. Some 
also attended. leeding. Several were 
Former Foreign Secretary An-|scorched and oil-umeared. 
thony Eden revealed that no rec-| Commander La Rocque'’s hand 
ords had n kept of the meetings|and face were burned, apparently 
between himself and Mr. Winant.|by a searing flame from the final 
This, he said, was the only in-|explosion, but he could not recall 
stance known te him in whichlexactly how he came by his in- 
was true 
eign Secretary and a major foreigniof many of the others in the 
Ambassador were unrecorded. |Solar's crew They had only vague 
“One man made thie possible,” he/notions of what burned or cut 
said, “and his name was John/them. 
| Winant. * * * No fairer, straighter; Just south of the Solar when 
|man ever walked this earth.” she blew up were the LST 28 and 
| Mr. Winant’s response to the/the Y Freighter 446, both loaded 
|many tributes was simple but ob- with assorted ammunition. Navy 
viously heartfelt. jand Coast Guard tugs, backed by 


« 


i such ag ig seldom seen in London| 
these days, gathered to add to the) 
honor that Britain is paying to the! 


AT MUNITION DEPOT 


LEONARDO, N. J., April 30— 
Lobo, a brown-and-white mon- 
grel of uncertain ancestry, who 


has been the mascot of the 
Solar's crew for the last five 
months, left the damaged vessel 
after all personnel had been re- 
moved somewhat damp—but in 
atyle. 

Lobo returned to the naval 
ammunition depot headquarters 
here in an ambulance that had 
come all the way from Oak- 
hurst, N. J.. to aid at the dis- 
aster, He was attended by «a 
first-aid squad, although he was 
uninjured. When he arrived a 
rousing cheer went up from the 
crewmen who had grown to love 
Lobo and to regard the part 
spitz and part spaniel dog as a 
member of the crew. 

Lobo joined the Solar in Nor- 
folk, Va. He represented an in- 
vestment of $4. 


water-spewing fireboats, slid 


throug 
hot metal and screaming shell 


the | tragments. 


Roughly one mile north of the! 
Solar’s original position, at the| 
Army Pier, which juts like a great 
concrete finger almost three miles 
into Raritan Bay, were the Liberty 
ships Lamar, Washington Alston, 
Behrman and Grace, each with an 
unofficially estimated 5,000 tons 
of ammunition aboard. Tugs pulled 
them bayward, too. 

Small craft, chiefly fifty-footers, 
swarmed around the burning Solar, 
meanwhile, picking injured sailors 
from the bay. The water's surface 
was thick with oil and on it float- 
ed seabags, shoes, parts of wooden 
chests, books, magazines and odds 
and ends blown from the Solar’s 
decks and from her interior. 

Curiously, not all the ammuni-| 
tion on the Solar exploded. Of the 
ammunition still aboard her when 
|the blast destroyed her, the great- 


jer part consisted of ‘hedgehogs,’ 


| 
| 


ards, toward the beach |20mm. ack-ack, and 3-inch shells.| 6 of the N 


Her torpedos and her $50-pound) 
depth charges, fortunately, already 
had been unloaded, 

As the great thick cloud from 
the explosion slowly lifted from| 
the bay, and as rescuers picked up) 
the injured hurled into the water,| 
the Solar’s officers and men went! 
aboard again to fight small fires. 
The fireboats stood by, helping,| 
and land fire crews poured tons of 
water, too, on the lar and on 
near-by burning structures. 
| These included a Navy barge, 
which s empty, on the western 
end of the ~ier, opposite the Solar’s 
original position, a trestle about 
200 yards +s est of the Solar, and, 
two Navy vans, or ammunition) 
trailers. Parts of the pier were) 
torn away, too, and burning oll 
sent off waves of heat until the 
fire fighters quenched them. 

The Solar’s paymaster 


| a _ 


0 Fe eo Some be 
queges, Earoll now and die- 
cover how easy languege 


westery can be! 


BERLITZ 


went | 


630 Fifth Ave. 
(at 50th Bt.) 
Cirete 6- 1416 


roughly, $6,000 to the men. He 
found the safe at last, buried in 
debris, and badly dented, but the 
$6,000 payroll and an additional 
$24,000 in cash were intact. 

Nava! officers at the depot ex- 
pressed astonishment and grati- 
tude for the swift response of res- 
cue units and medical and Red 


|\Cross aid. The Monmouth County 


Red Cross assembled its member- 
—= in record time and got all Jts 
rolling stock and other equipment 


jto the station in ample time to be! Elite Guard was plotting against! 


of service. 

Ambulances and more doctors, 
nurses and medical attendants 
than were needed swarmed into 
the depot from Fort Hancock, 
Raritan Arsenal and Monmouth 
County hospitals. Within twenty 
minutes after the blast they all 
but clogged the main highways 
leading to Leonardo. 

Comdr, N. F. X. Banvard, senior 
medical officer at the Neval Am- 


h the rising smoke to tow|mution Depot, said tonight that the jjeved that German 
ond minor explosion in the for-\tnem bayward, out of the rain of|injured were dispersed as follows: colonies but he had never nave 


Eight in Fort Hancock Army 
Hospital, two of these critical; one 
critically injured, in Monmouth 
Memorial Hospital in Long Branch; 
one critically injured, Fort Mon- 
mhouth Station Hospital; twenty- 
five injured, one critically, Naval 
Ammunition Depot Dispensary, 
Earle, N. J. ¢ 

Station spokesmen announced 
tonight that two investigations 
were under way. One is being con- 
ducted by a depot investigating 
body, the other by a Naval Board 
of Inquiry. 


¢ spokesman reported that tionalists bade the Communists 
which began its cease painting slogans on walls) 
consists of and handing out subversive lit-| "am ‘not 
F. Foster, 
inspector general, senior munists opened fire with auto- 


the Navy board, 
investigation today, 
Rear Admiral Paul 
Navy 
board member; Capt. J. A. Rood, 
general inspector, Third Naval 
District member; Capt. C. E. 
Coney, assistant Navy 
general; Capt. C. R. Will, general 
inspector, Bureau of Ordnance, 


land James H. Sheridan of the of- for two, three, four or six years.) 


avy inspector general, 
clerical assistant. 


FINE LUGGAGE SINCE 1839 
400 MADISON AVENUE - SEW YORK 


inspector a chance to become a well paid 


him responsible for all illegal acts ago with this warning. The fact that they 
committed by any of the defend- 
ants before he openly broke with 
Hitler. 

Describing this break, which 
came just before the war, Schacht 
said that the removal of Field Mar- 
shal Gens. Werner von Fritsch 
and Werner von Blomberg and the! 
obvious trend of Hitler’s policy as 
handied by the incompetent 
Joachim von Ribbentrop had been 
leading inevitably to war. In De- 
cember, 1937, he said Mr. Dodd! 
called on him, warned him that the! 


are still with us carries a suggestion that 


we need scarcely stress. 


ob) Ondnea. 
MEN'S 7.446.062 6 
17 West 50th Street * 630 Fifth Avenue 


his life and urged him to flee with| ROCKEFELLER CENTER 


him to the United States, where,)=——— 


the Amb BLIC oS 
e Ambassador assured him, he! c NOT 


; would find a warm welcome, 
| Schacht made no pretense about} 
his political convictions. Although | PLEASE take notice that Samusi Lake and 
never a member of the Nazi party, |as fasel ‘Dr Pcundrine Co. at S06 McDougal 
che said, he was in harmony with | Bklyn, N Y. have sold their business and 
virtually all it stood for in the! 


will have no further tien with that 
| firm. The business will be conducted here- 
early days except the persecution | ‘i 
\of the Jews. Easel 


Pokrnesa & Irving Schwarts 
li continue the use the trade name 
| i 
PAR 
Schacht said that he firmly be-/ Ww. o~ 
|MacLeod Company, « E 
== will bee insed by Frank W 
business con) yf 
force, nor} Kenna, doing business as Donald Macleod Co 


Commercial Notices 
LOWER rates. free golf, congenial ra 
June at Berkshire Country > , 
N Y; horsebacking free Mon- ; temnis. a 
land and water sports. good food, . 
ay Ot Honeymooners ¢ ° 
tages $55; clubhouse $60; 2 hrs G 


Phone PE 6-1940 or write, 11 W 43 a. : 


NO GAMBLING ARRESTS fer 

wa — Tl se ae Ay tough - 
et » ll year us! . 
dally Bio. se postcards, x i quaslities: 
mounted biow-ups, 20n30, $2.50. 30nd. $3.85. 
Write for free samples. Moss Phote 

155 W 46 St. N Y C 19. BRyant 9-8682 
LINCOLN'S Samay, Ae and Excerpts 
from Washington's rewell Address, beau- 
tifully Mlustrated black and white prints, 1Ji« 
wv, envy stock, suitable pemens: offices, 
banks, schools, institutions. Sc a es 
be poen, Designer, 1216 Orleans, t, 
ie 


. : ar and 
business as Donald 


Mc- 
cated taking them a 
had he ever suggested the forcible MY a ey ge gp Bg gt + 


my 
recovery of the Polish Corridor and |». tor her debts and obligations. ward 
J Franklin Files Jr., S7@ Fort Washington Ave., 
Upper Silesia. raaiia Vee 
st A pu wine glossy 
from i Goodman, the retail ‘ 
Jeweiry — at uit avy, NY C. Credit-/} 
ors present claims to Barnet Schwarts, Atty, 
$80 Sav, NY 


Four Killed in Athens Affray 


By Wireless to Tus New Youre Tres. 


graph low as . 6G p —~ no. 


ATHENS, April 30— In a Clash sy -WIFE Eicasor Dern (nes Gresel) left my 20S 166 W 4 &t. ‘ ¥cwu BR 1723, 
} * i res e gEx-ar's! ” 
in which grenades were thrown in), oe hee ata Wik 4... * epee | K-GI's! | tte twice se ¢ Ontins pelecting your 


the Peristeri suburb here, police),,.. w. ___ distinctively tallored 
reported today, two Communists! Roles thal Gertvwde Goldstein clothes. You'll to our stock, wed 
and two nationals were killed and), >4t,s0d the delicatessen nd srooery, Oyrome too, onl $58 ub Bee Scnuister, % ay 
several others wounded, Police said) Lo 2 
* BADIO supply 
uv CU he unnee tear set 
$17.50: 


the fracas started when the Na-| VINEE"? Jitioned  Pinecastie = ~4 Y 
aose write Se Seen rent (supplies 17¥, 
fr eth apart; kit, diagram, wired ready 
reeponal | Army. “Navy _cquipment et “reasmanle, prices. 
' Kr | Radio Ham — 


; 1 r oO 63 
PikMONDE, «a7 a : 
low at com- 


a PLANNING 
Sunnyside, L I, N Y, will not be responsible LS 
ry 
Tiss. 


for my wife, Mrs. Catherine Barmonde’s debts x! 
ypesetting.. varityping 
do an rough | 


ard wontes. wo /? 
you want. call me ery 

Navy pay is good—and you have) 1 etek ae MOTHER 
| PART Aissalved Apell & 1944, detwees 
George A. Feider and Lawrence Gilman. do- 
ing business as Felder & Gilman at 552 West- 

chester Ave, Bronx 

AN will drive gentleman's car Call 


for transportation references 

; - T werk, > 
MERE reporting West Coast deliver to give 1 day service, circulars, 
car for dealer or private party ¢x- 


sare 
ate, ete. Black & white and cnloe work rape. 
. ° ¥ 
tm; refs. ESplenede 17-0838. duced in most economical manner. H ers 

( Marlene), 396 Colum-|set Co, Inc, 636 ll Av, N Y¥ 19. Cl 6-40B4 
Av, sold. Creditors present cial S| eumen seam ea ee ae ee 

. CHILDREN'S candid picteres taken 
Ha abe eae NE cr bore fame Noten ment rengonanie ie 2 


your 
r - 
+ Tne, Av, NY ©, estion. Charming Pietures, (days) MU 3-3668, 


Sescivet as of — ™ 1946 } coves) AC 4-2260 
Notices | te drive; eons. al 
Bis. Tes 
- . Med- 
.. _ 


safety 
| New York Gilp froternal orzenl. 7) a tute School, 145 W 14 St 16-7 
thetr t | 
"at rae in Butters hounty Supreve ern, 303 Amsterdam Av (74). EN 
concrete walks. alks bm bode, 


e063. 229 EB i4 St (2-3 Ave. GR 
{ » Concrete grave Ge FER M te print your own 
Contractors ‘interested im ob-| tickets, etc. With new precision ter; com- 
did write 23329 Times. _.. plete, $9.50. Hasco Co, 17 W x cos 
tls Tee AS amps. sek. 4339 + - 
green, summer trop! ise. | GWN = future lovely summer senside heme in 
42; Wace shirts, sizes 30-42 | one of America's great vacation lands. Writ 
. Army + to Montauk Beach Chamber of Commerce, 1 
in _Uni- 404. NY C. for tlustrated booklet, 
INVEST IGA TIONS—Sthicaily disoreetly a 
helesale | “attention to small cases Personal, 
tial, Industrial. 


Vv. Hexel 166-43 Beth Av, 


erature, whereupon the Com- ei 


matic weapons. 


Academy Photo Offset. 15 B 334 Au 
CONVENTIONS; sales meetings; outage 
outstanding mountain resort B-_ fact - 
ities available for first and second in 
Jume and second and third weeks ip 
suite 


etc 


expert through Navy training. You 


can now enlist in the Regular Navy) 
exchs 


tater 


Go te your nearest highest 


Navy ren 
| Station, 


ere 


arm: 


. 3 
| large fobs, ectimates submitted: 
Max Schusterow, CI 5-766 


3- Roce velt Hirer, 
We st! ‘ark, Chauffeur-driven limousine. Lea 
= af | NYC daily Reservations FO T- 
| Al CONDITIONERS. sew and 
| for and homes, installed 
| serviced. M item, 103 W 64th. TH 4-322. 
eachange transportation expense. 


FOR Mothers Day. wale . 
fancy ice cream cake. A ? tien. Mar 
ehieny. UN 4-4253 
LINOLEU MS, sapnali tla ig siecki Testalied 
reasonadl Fishier’s, 3 | Be U §- 4439 ™ 
CaBretes cash, trom offices, stores, 
| hotels, Cali 2-421) Wiltea. 
STAM cotme weated. | ellee- 
ders 43 4 Fete 
Parts Co, 183 led mm, Provideus, & 
a 


* 


fine refer- 


GES 

are - Your tavertle 
suit restored. Write for Circular T 

W ST [4 
( ines). 
$4. Novelty Letter, 1214 Broadway (406) 
‘ interns atin ‘ 
carpeting selentifically 


inexpensively on premises 


. ee Sees 
ms 





BRITAIN SUGGESTS 
50-YEAR RUAR RULE 


2 Alternative Schemes Offered 
to French, One Including 
Left Bank of Rhine 


| 


By HAROLD CALLENDER 
By Wireless to Tus New Yorx Tiseus. 
PARIS, April 30—While Secre- 
tary of State James F. Byrnes 
was proposing a security guarantee 
in the form of a twenty-five-year 
four-power treaty for the complete 
disarmament of Germany, the Brit- 
ish were seeking to meet French 
ideas of security by suggesting an 
international regime for. the Ruhr 
for as much as fifty years, it was 
authoritatively learned tonight. 
Two alternative British projects, 
one for ths Ruhr alone and the 
other for the combined region of 
the Ruhr and the left bank-of the 
Rhine, embody the principie, dear 
to the French, of decentralizing 
Germany by creating more or less 
autonomous states loosely feder- 
ated. The principal French mis- 
giving is that both plans would 
take effect only when the occupa- 
tion of Germany had ended and 
meanwhile the British would hang 
on to the Ruhr and its coal for an 
indefinite period. Even a fifty-year 
international regime does not sat- 
isfy the French, who want the per- 
manent removal of the Ruhr: from 
German control. But the French 
are encouraged by the British lean- 
ing toward federalizm. 
e British and the Americans 


think that Foreign Minister Vya- 
choslav M. Molotov’s insistence) WASHINGTON, April 30—The| 


that a study of Mr. Byrnes’ dis-|value and importance to the United 
armament treaty be preceded by &| States of a strong opposition and 
special r+ wt into par yr tnng the two-party system have been 
sanahies seemmel ute vies tien! currently emphasized by three 


Byrnes’ Plan “Bombshell” events. Foremost is the proposal 


The French and the British said|by Secretary of State James F. 


today that Mr. Byrnes” treaty pro-|Byrnes to the Big Four Foreign 
posal yesterday was a bombshell | Ministers that at their meetifig in 
and therefore they were unpre-|Paris they discuss a twenty-five 
pared. They said that the treaty 
that had been sent to them in Feb-| 
ruary was marked “top secret” 
and only a few of the highest offi- 
cia’; had even known of it. In 
London it was not circulated even 
within the Cabinet or the usual 
Foreign: Office channels, so that 
the acceptance “in principle” that 
it evoked was sent in the expecta- 
tion that the United States would 
make some further move, not by 
publishing the treaty but by dis- 
cussing it with the other powers. 
The British here were reticent 


pact to the same purpose for 
Japan. The other events are 
speeches made last Saturday night 
by Senator Joseph H. Ball of Mir- 
nesota and former Senator Henry 
Cabot Lodge Jr. of Massachusetts. 
The projected treaty follows in 
broad outline and somewhat in de- 
tail a proposal to this effect by 
Senator Arthur J. Vandenberg of 
Michigan in 1945. It has become 
a cornerstone of our foreign polic 
before receiving any formal cachet 
about the treaty today, saying that |from the Republican party, among 
they had hardly considered it yet.|;whose leaders Mr. Vandenberg 
The Russians appeared hostile, to|stands in the first rank. But be- 
judge by their tactics at the con-|cause of its origin that party gains 
ference. The French view, as ex-|some of the credit for a sugges- 
plained to me by a high official, |tion at breaks with the tradi- 
was thai the American commit-/tional foreign policy of the United 


ment in Europe involved in the States and may ae the major 
ew acco among the 


Republicans Score 


Vandenberg’s Suggestion for 4-Power Pact, 
Bali, Lodge Talks Stress Two-Party Value 


By ARTHU 
Special te Tas New Yours Trans. 


— of 


proposed treaty was an immense 
Big Threetand France, 


contribution, but that disarma- 
Would End Allies Fears 


ment alone was insufficient and in 
no sense a substitute for the 
French plan to separate the Ruhr} Mr. Vandenberg made his pro- 
and the left bank of the Rhine [posal in 4 speech to the Senate on 
from Germany in order to deprive|January 10 last year. His effort 
her of her war potential. was to pose a specific issue over 
foreign policy for national debate. 
Pian Is Criticized He urged that the United States, 
The French believe, as the Monde| Great tam “tmnetiahdey he — 
, , a 
says today, that ate. Syenes treaty and fast” treaty guaranteeing the 
is designed to satisfy American! disarmament of Germany and 
opinion by permitting the with-|Japan. Mr. Vandenberg asserted 
@rawal of our troops from Ger-|that only by removing the fear of 
many. The French are not enthusi-|future German aggression and the 
astic about it, preferring the long|fear of future American isolation- 
eccupation that they advocate tojism could the trend toward unilat- 


the long guarantee without occu- 


eral settlement of affairs in Bu- 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


Riding over the rugged terrain at the foothills of the Elbruz Mountains 


R KROCK 


“maaesca” or the “common man” 
or even the “average man.” 

The authoritarian in politica is 
one who believes that a particu- 
lar group, whether it be in gov- 
ernment, in labor, or in business, 
has a special mission to plan the 
whole pattern of society and to 
require all individuals, whether 
they lke ‘t or not, to fit into 
that pattern. . 

Mr. eon the same evening 


lyear, four-power treaty to keep|was telling the Republicans of Ore- 
‘Germany disarmed and later a/gon these things: 


The other party should be 
given credit for having a public 
program which contains many 
good intentions. It has pro- 
claimed certain goals 
which conform to age-old hu- 
man aspirstions.* * * But there 
is the widest kind of difference 
between favoring social legisia- 
tion as a supplement to your 
economy and favoring govern- 
mental action as your chief 
source of jobs. * * * Large-scale 
production * * * is the quickest 
way to spread lots of good jobs 
throughout the land * * * a 
much better way than by Gov- 
ernment-made work programs— 
although we would not hesitate 
to use the power of Government 
to combat depressions if one 
should ever come again. * * * As 
Republicans we must always re- 
member that we exist to pro- 
mote the aspirations of the rank 
and file of the people. We do 
not exist in order to cater to the 
ambitions of any minority or 
vested interest, no matter how 
powerful it may appear to be. 

I know many Republicans who 
think that our choice is between 
trying to outdeal the New Deal 
on the one hand or standing for 
what they call “the fundamental 
rights of the individuai” on the 
other. * * * If we are restricted 
to these two alternatives I feel 
sorry for the Republican party-— 
for the Democratic party—and 
for the United States. 

One of the three speeches al- 


STUDY FINDS ‘PERIL’ 


10 WAR SECRETS 


Coitinued From Page 1 


or secret, items were being re- 
leased by the State Department 
for disposa! abroad, but that it 
was the nature of “declassified” 
articles, no longer on secret lists, 
which were being sought abroad 
and the reported terms of the ne- 
gotiations to obtain them which 
caused the concern. 

Two representatives of the Ray- 
theon Manufacturing Company, 
Waltham, Mass., were said to have 
testified that a condition to pend- 
ing negotiations with Russia for 
the sale of component radar parts 
was that the company provide the 
“know-hgqw,"” or techniques, of as- 
sembly and production. According 
to the testimony, it was proposed 
contractually, it was reported, that 
Russian scientisite and engineers 
be sent to the “.merican plant for 
instruction. 


Way Around Law Seen 


With training in techniques, it! 
was contended, foreign buyers 
could assemble “declassified” com- 
ponent parts into a complete work- 
ing apparatus duplicating a ma- 


IRAN’S MILITARY STUDENTS ON HORSEBACK 


Prince Is Born in Sweden, 

Assaring Royal Lineage 

By Wireless to Tas New Youx Tans. 

STOCKHOLM, Sweden, April 
30—A Swedish hereditary Prince 
was born today, the son of 
Prince Gustaf Adolf, grandson of 
the King, and his wife, Princess 
Sibylia. The baby was christened 
Carl Gustaf. 

The whole of Sweden received 
the news with extreme joy, since 
the birth of the boy assures the 
succession of the Bernadotte 
family on the Swedish throne. 

The succession had been in 
danger until today, as Prince 
Gustaf Adolf has had four 
daughters and all of his brothers 
but one married commoners and 
therefore lost their rights to the 


| throne. Women may not succeed 


in Sweden. 

The new-born Prince is the 
great-grandson of the 88-year- 
old Swedish King and therefore 
is predestined for the Swedish 
throne, although first his grand- 
father, Crown Prince Gustaf 
Adolf, 64, and then his father, 
Prince Gustaf Adolf will become 
Kings before him. 

The Swedish Navy and coasta! 
batteries fired an eighty-four- 
gun salute for the infant Prince, 
who was officially appointed the 
Duke of Ocland. 


————————— 


TABRIZ RYACUATED 
BY SOVIET TROOPS 


rong in Azerbaijan Capital 
Cheers Departure—Accord 
Reported in Secret Talks 


By Wireless to Tas New Youx Toces. 
TEHERAN, Iran, April 30—Ta- 
briz announced last n'ght that the 
Russian Army had marched out 
of that city, the capital of Azer- 
baijan Province, that 


So- 


Parliament visited the Tabriz 
and ordered the review 
within twenty-four hours of all 
prisoners’ cases with a view to lib- 
erating as many as possible. 
‘ 


Reported 


TEHERAN, Iran, April 30 
A reliable diplomatic source said 
agreement had been reached in 
conversations here between Prime 
Minister Ahmed Ghavam and So- 
viet Ambassador I. V. Sadchikov, 
and at Tabriz between the Russian 
Consul General and Jaffar Pishe- 
vari, President of the self-pro- 
claimed autonomous state of Iran- 
lan Azerbaijan. 

Both governmental and diplo- 
matic circles said Azerbaijan Prov- 
ince probably would return to the 
Central Government, with Mr. 
Pishevari as Provincial Gove->nor 
General, his “Cabinet” becoming 
heads of departments and his Par- 
liament becoming the Provincial 
Council. 

A member of the Iranian Parlia- 
ment, who asked anonymity, said 
that the “broad outline of accepted 
policy” was contained in Prime 
Minister Ghavam’'s seven-point pro- 
gram of April 22, in which he in- 
vited the Azerbaijanians to return 
to the Central Government. That 
program included provisions for 
cultural and political improve- 
ments in the northwestern Prov- 
ince. 

That program, the Parliament 
member ad was “a statement 
of agreement—not of proposals.” 


FREE WORSHIP ENDORSED 


Baptist Union Wants It Provided 
For in Peace Treaties 


By Wireless to Tun Stew Teas Toees 
LONDON, April 30-——-A resolu- 


iP 


BRITISH SEEK TO BUY 
SURPLUS U.S. VESSELS 


By Wireless to Tas New Youx Traces. 
LONDON, April 30—Although 
Great Britain is building just over 


SENATORS APPROVE 


PLAN FOR GERMANY 


half the total shipping tonnage|Members of Foreign Relations 


now known to be under construc- 
tion in the world, British ship own- 
ers stili are keenly interested in 
obtaining United States surplus 
ships, and the first of such pur- 
chases are believed in London 
shipping circles to be imminent. 
ere is great secrecy surround- 
ing the actual deal, but it has been| 
learned on good authority that the 
purchase of five ships is being ne- 
gotiated. At least two of the five 
already are in British waters, but 
informed sources say that high 


owever, the impetus comes from 
private owners who are anxious to 
get C-1 and C-2 type ships for 
schedule runs. Under the Bland 
Bill, only ten of these vessels can 
be sold within a period of ninety 
days following publication of the 
Maritime Commission's maximum 
prices in the Federal Register. 

But if the present transaction 
involving five ships goes through, 
a good pop t= are likely to be} 
bought by tain after the time) 
limit expires. That, of course, de- 
pends on Congressional approval of | 
the loan to Britain. 


COURT-MARTIAL ATTACKED 


Wife Sues Here to Set Aside 
Sentence of Army Officer 


John E. Okenfus, 31-year-old) 
former Army Air Forces captain, 
who in 1944 received a three-year 
court-martial sentence in India on| 
charges of willfully disobeying an| 
order, sought his release yesterday 
before Federal Judge Simon H. 
Rifkind in a habeas corpus pro-| 
ceedings begun by his wife, Doreen; 
of 338 Bloomfield Avenue, Bloom- 
field, N. J. 

The court-martial was character- 
ized by Eugene F. Lefkowitz, the) 
petitioner's counsel, as “part of a} 
plot to make an example of Oken-| 
fus for an offense of which he was) 
not guilty ip order to enforce dis- 





Committee View It in Light 
of U. N. Charter 


Special to Tus New Yous Tress. 


WASHINGTON, April 30 — The 
proposed twenty-five-year four- 
power treaty to keep Germany dis- 
armed, presented by Secretary of 
State James F. Byrnes at the For- 
eign Ministers’ conference in Paris 
yesterday, received a favorable 
initial reaction from members of 
the Senate Foreign Relations Com- 
mittee today. 

Some, but only a few, 
tions were entered by members 
who either had studied the Paris 
dispatches sufficiently for discus- 
sion or appeared to have had 
knowledge of its provisiona in ad- 
vance of its presentation. Senator 
Carl Hatch, Democrat, of News 
Mexico, conditioned his approval 
only on the assurance that the 
treaty would not conflict with the 
United Nations. 

“It is my opinion,” Senator War 
ren R. Austin, Republican, of Ver- 
mont said, “that the Dumbarton 
Oaks plan and the United Nations 
charter contemplated precisely 
such an arrangement as this by 
providing an interim arrangement 
for the pacification of the erlemy 
to be carried out by those coun- 
tries in the United Nations which 
had been responsible for the vic- 
tory. 


“Within Spirit of Charter” 


“Sucn an interim arrangement 
should be recognized as being with- 
in the spirit and letter of the char- 
ter. The effect of the charter on 
this situation ts a previous sanc- 
tion for such an arrangement.” 

Senator Robert M. LaFollette, 
Progressive, of Wisconsin, said: 
“My reaction is that if this pro- 
posal will -_ to bring about a 
democratic solution of the prob- 
lems confronting the powers in 
seeking to secure the vee 
would be inclined to support it.” 

Senator James M. Tunnetli, Dem- 
ocrat of Delaware, said that he did 
“not believe that we should get 


jcipline and ignore justice.” Usingjout any sooner than twenty-five 


the terms “railroaded” and “kan-| years. 
garoo court,” the attorney declared| 


that “the record of trial and staff 
judge advocate review clearly indi- 
cate an admitted plan to manu- 
facture evidence.” 


I think,” he said, “the 
troops should remain at least until 
the conditions that might breed a 
Third Worid War are eliminated.” 

Other members chose to study 
the proposal further before mak- 


Judge Rifkind reserved decision. ing commitments or observations. 


jtion urging on the Council of For-| 


leign Ministers that the peace 


chine or instrument still on our|testimony the members reported|treaties now under consideration 
“classified” list. Thus, it was held, the following: 


buyers could “get around the law”) 


There was no substantiation 


jshould embody provisions for in- 
jsuring full religious freedom was 


and attain a parity in progress and|thus far of reports that the State|/passed unanimously by the As-| 


production with the 
despite present legal safeguards. 


It was noted in this connection|vy Departments, had “encouraged” 


resolution specified 
that what was wanted was “full 


nited States|Department, which clears items|sembly of the Baptist Union here| 
“declassified” by the War and Na-|today. The 


Me 


FACE POWDER 


that under Lend-Lease, Allied gov-|manufacturers of radar and other|religious freedom of worship and 


ernments received complete radar equipment to sell or license their|Witness, precluding restrictions 
and other equipment “right up to products to foreign powers or na-/8nd violations still sanctioned by 
V-J Day” and thus appeared to be tionals. \law and practiced in many lands.” 
equipped already for at least at-| The State Department, under; The Assembly welcomed the 
tempted assembly of whole ma-|existing law, apparently cannot/establishment of the United Na- 
chines from these models with the|discourage the release to foreign|tions and emphasized the impor- 
aid of unrestricted purchases o*| powers or nationals of articles no|tance of the Economic and Social 
component parts. longer on War and Navy “classi-|Council. It urged the necessity 
The State Department announced fied” lists. for the full and frank discussion of 
yesterday that, with the exception| “Declassification” of secrets ap-|al! issues raised in the United Na- 
of some material jointiy developed parently had gone so far beyond|tions’ Assembly and Security 
by the United States and other|the field of electronics that pend-|Council. 
countries (such as radar), noling legislation seeking to increase| Finally the Assembly recorded 
“classified” equipment in the elec-|protection should be broadened|its conviction that a heavy re- 
tronic field had been released for|materially. sponsibility rested on the churches 
sale or licensing abroad since the) The trouble seems to be with the|/everywhere to break down bar- 
termination of the Lend-Lease|law more than with its adminis-|riers of misunderstanding, to cul- 


gram. It added that it had no|tration, although interpretations of|tivate fellowship overriding na- 


to give you that “who-is- 


she*’ look. Women every- 
where say “it agrees with 
my skin.” In fashion-right 
shades, $1 and $2 sizes. 


New York « Peris 


Marmonizing DuBarry Lipsticks, $1 each. (ai! prices pive tax) 


ro; 
ready has produced important re- Con authority to prevent the salejit might have given greater con-|tional frontiers and to give full 
were responsible for contemporary|gylts in foreign policy. The others|/°f “unclassified” material abroad. |sideration to what could be done|support and encouragement to all 
troubles with Britain and the\undoubtedly will be reflected in| The negotistions of four Ameri-|with component parts while “the|statesmen striving to establish 
Soviet Union. domestic policy. And all are of|can companies are scheduled for|whole” remained in secret clas-|good-will and friendly relations 


pation that Mr. Byrnes suggests. 

The French are about to revive 
their 1921 treaty with Poland and 
in this way to seek for their Rhine- 


rope be ended. He said these See 


land scheme, rejected by the Bri-| The fears were “human and 
tish, support father east in what/understandable,” he said, and our! 
the western powers regard as thejallies had a “perfect right,” if! 
Russian zone. Whether this means|/power politics and ententes were 
the support of the Soviet Union|to disappear, to ask fgr assurances) 


itself remains obscure. that the United Statés would as-|Walter Bedell Smith and George|of Nebraska. Today's inquiry cen- 
sist them in keeping down the mili-/Kennan, United States Ambansa-|tered on the Raytheon company, | 
tarists of the Axis nations. He\dor and Minister, respectively, in| wi 
declared that the United States'the Moscow Embassy ii 
had no “right” to expect nations to | Paris today. Tie former joins the|liam 
rely for safety on « system of col-|staff of Secretary of State James|sentative, a former naval com-/the inquiry had “just begun.” 
lective security which depended on|F. Byrnes at the conference of|mander 
The | Foreign Ministers and the latter is|partment’s Bureau of Ships. 
treaty proposed, he said, would re-\en route to Washington with his 


The British Ruhr plan calls for| 
an international commission with 
power to take over the administra- 
tion or to bring in troops in an 
emergency. The French say that 
this assures no control of the day- 
to-day political government of the 
German state to be created, and| 
hey insist that the political powers |™ 
must be broad enough to include| 
the control of the customs in order 
to control exports. The political 
powers that the British propose 
seem to the French to te a form of 
sanctions difficult to apply, es- 
pecially since the four powers 
might not all agree. 

In one British plan, the Ruhr’s 
mines would be administered by 
the Germans under the control of 
a four-power commission, but in 
the other plan the mines would be- 


an enigmatic United States. 


ove the uncertainty. 
This speech furnished the raw 


discussion at Paris. The argu- 
ments and the objectives are the 


The common theme of Senator 
Ball and Mr. Lodge was American 
liberalism within the free enter- 
prise system, though one spoke at 
Syracuse, N. Y., and the other at 
Portland, Ore., without advance 
conmultation. Their joint effort 
was mo 
come the property of the newly/¢, a. liberal Geuition that” hae 
created Ge man state or of a pub- stop well short of statism and ool- 
lic utility corporation under thatijectivism. Then the party, they 
state. The latest French plan, it/implied, could offer a conatructive 
was learned tonight, provided for/chalienge which would compel 
a commission of eight members to'those in power to retreat from 
govern the Ruhr, holding the of | statiam and collectivism or run an 
fices of Ministers of State. increasing risk of being voted out 

anne of office. 


Objectives of a Liberal Stated 


Senator Ball's speech was very 
long, but these brief extracts will 
convey an idea ef his formula: 


| 
| 


LA FOLLETTE CALLS 
BRITAIN A BAD RISK| 


Special to Tax New Yorn Trees 


Roberts, 


Moscow. 


WASHINGTON, April 30— 
Senator Robert M. LaFollette 
Jr. of Wisconsin discussed the 
proposal for a loan of $3,750,000,- 
000 to Great Britain in the Senate 
today and asserted that the Brit- 
ish Empire trading system was 
crumbling; that Great Britain 
was a bad risk and the loan would 
create bad feeling between the 
two nations. 

Meanwhile Speaker Rayburn 
predicted approval of the measure 


A political liberal in my dio- 
tionary has two primary objec- 
tives. One is to assure the 
greatest degree of economic and 
political freedom for all individ- 
uals consistent with enjoyment 
of the same degree of freedom 
by all other individuals. The 
second objective is equality for 
all ind‘viduals * * * equality of 
opportunity and equality before 
the law. * * * You will never 
find a liberal, according to my 
definition, talking about the 


\Republican origin. 


More Diplomats in Paris 
By Wireless to Tus New Youx Treas. 


investigation by the subcommittes, | sification. 

which is headed by Senator East-| The principal weakness was 
land of Mississippi and includes|found in the Trad:ng With the En- 
Senators McFarland, Democrat, of|emy Act of 1917, which the pend- 


Members of the subcommittee 


PARIS, April 30 — Lieut. Gen./Arizona, and Wherry, nquiry cen-| A legislation seeks to strengthen. 


family to to a new post. Frank 


cAls day eclipses into tranquil night, 


pamper the mood for an 


, arrived in| El 


tish Minister to the 
material for the draft of the treaty| Soviet Union, also came to Parisitimony by these witnesses was sales of 
which Mr. Byrnes hag offered for|this afternoon on his way back to|withheld by the subcommittee for 

the time, but on the basis of the 


appeared uncertain yesterday 
testimony taken from rp A a heed conditions warranted in- 
eneral m r, and Wil-|vestigation, but after today’s two 
ton, Washington repre-|closed sessions they declared that 


Officials of “several Government 
——— will be called, Senator 

sacd, as well as repre- 
Views on Testimony sentatives of the other three com- 


Detailed information on the tes-| panies as negotiating for 
cts abroad. 


Maths 


ed to the Navy De- 


among all peoples. 


Pirie Southeast Asia Air Chief 
By Wireless to Tus New Youu Treas. 

LONDON, April 30-—Air Mar- 
shal Sir George C. Pirie has been 
appointed Air Commander in Chief, 
Headquarters, Air Command, 
Southeast’ Asia, to succeed Air 
Chief Marshall Sir Keith Park, the 
Air Ministry announced today. The 
appointment is effective imme- 
diately. Air Marshal Pirie has 
been deputy commander in South- 
east Asia since June, 1945. From 
19387 to 1041 he was British air 
attaché in Wash ’ 


DRESS FOR A 


owl Dag: 


A gay dey et the races 
+++ of @ Springtime Sunday 
in the country! 
Light-hearted multicolor 
print on.@ new off-white. 
Extravagontly foke “jewels” 
for buttons. Sizes 10-16. 
40.00 


at Merald Square, N. ¥. C. 1 


Jewelry Brokerage Service 
efiers yeu extraerdinzary values 


Bay directly from the owner and pay 
rock-bottom prices (Macy's acts merely 
as agent). You pay only the price at 
which the jewelry is evaluated—no in- 
flated margin of profit is added. See 
our magnificent, ever-changing colleo- 
tion. (You may pay 4 down on Macy's 
Cash-Time Plan.) Macy’s Street Floor. 


Left to right, 3 from a collection: 
Diamond and platinum ring, appr. 4-4 ct_@1320@ 


. L . il . 
in the House as well as in the Sen- evening at “ome in 4 long skirted 


ate “before we go home for the! 
summer recess.” 

Senator William F. Knowland, 
Republican of California, offered 
an amendment which would limit 
the amount of the credit to the| 
Treasury's surplus of receipts over 
expenditures (its budget surplus) 
from the time of the enactment of 
the law until the payment to Brit- 
ain was made. The amendment! 
also would preclude any advance 
to Britain until domestic supply of 
goods was balanced with demand, 
a state of fact which would have) 
to be proclaimed by the President. | 


He said it would not require re- 
negotiation of the agreement but) het - Caing 
merely served notice on the Ad-| 
ministration of Congressional in- ss 
tent to balance the budget and) 13-15 West 57th Street 


— inflation 


FUR 
STORAGE 


AT STANDARD RATES 


Phone 
Plaza 3-7700 


rayon crepe that’s all rippling movement. 


In prints... white ground ‘with royal blue, 
red or green and black motifs. 


Gn solid colors... 


agua with yellow belt and facings, 


navy with chartreuse. 98.95 
Ghird Floor 


JEUNE FILLE SALON 


GIVE TO FIGHT 
CANCER 


Diamond and platinum bracelet, 
appr. 4% et 
Fancy diamond ring, appr. 1% ct 


Subject to prior sale. 
20% Federal Excise Tax included. 


Sell your jewelry at its true retail worth 
through Macy's Jewelry Brokerage Service. 
(Large stones are especially in demand now.) 
Your gems are evaluated, placed on sale, can 
be withdrawn without charge. When sold, you 
receive the selling price, minus « fair broker 
age fee. Brokerage Office, Macy's Eighth Floor. 


2048 
as40e 


Macy’s open dally 9:45 te G@; Thersdays till 9 


s 





Mp |BRITISH FOR DELAY 


ALL-WAYS 
4 
BEST B UY 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY_ 1, 1946. _ 


BMIR WILL BR KING |FIRST U: §. RAMILIBS| === 


ON BYRNES’ OFFER 


5 Bevin Wants All the German 


Issues Discussed—Cabinet 
Still to Be Consulted 


By Wireless to Taz New Yoru Times. 
LONDON, April 


‘g\of State James F. Byrnes’ draft 
Sitreaty providing for twenty-five- 


a el 


Blot the Duchy of Lancaster—tha 
S\deals with German affairs, but it 


year four-power control of Ger- 
many has already received British 
support in principle, it was learned 
here today. It was impossible for 
Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin to 
do more than accept tentati 
because not even his Cabinet - 
leagues had been consulted or knew 
anything about the State Depart- 
ment’s proposed treaty. 

It had come to London marked 
as top secret and it was kept so. 
That means that it did not leave a 
very restricted circle in the For- 

Office. There is a group here 
ended by J. B. Evnd, ae 


‘|was not informed of the American 


| plan. 
~| pressed today enthusiastic support 


ROCK WN’ RYE (ets Geattened) 
70 Proof 440. 


ROCK N’ RUM 956 | 
48 Proof ana. | 
| 


J pete” COCKTAILS 


; Reedy te Serve * Suet Chill end Pour 
“| MANHATTAN 4/8 at. 257 


alt MARTINI asa 2% 
| All at 48 Proof 


aso CORDIALS 


Smooth * Mellow * Deliciove 
BLACKBERRY 


APRICOT a 
CHERRY 268 ia 
CREME DE MENTHE fi 
CREME DE CACAO es 
ANISETTE seQt. & 
KAHVEH (Coffee) 


KUMMEL as ar. 239 
All at 48 Proof 


34 dl 





as i 


| 
| BLACKBERRY ; 


APRICOT 


CHERRY na. 38 FS 
PEACH 


jmilitary potential by destroying) 


One member of that office ex- 


for Mr. Byrnes’ Graft treaty, and 
that probably was typical of the 
general reaction among Britons 
who have had anything to do with 
Germany and who heve been thor- 
oughly disceuraged by the present 
set-up. They will be happy to re- 
place this chaotic system that is 
aimed at destroying Germany's} 


James F. Byrnes at a party given b 


FINANCIAL AID URGED 
TO STABILIZE FRANCE 
her industrial structure. Special to Tus New Yorx Times 
Another official remarked that) WASHINGTON, April 30—Sub- 
“something very fruitful has been|stantial American financial aid for! 
thrown into the pool” and nobody|France was advocated in a survey 
here would deny that. At the same/published today by the Forel 
time, one must recognize certain/Policy Association. Written = 
deterrents to immediate acceptance|/Mrs. Winifred N. Hadsel, the arti- 
of the American scheme. cle recommended such aid as 
Aside trom the necessity of con-|only means through which France 
sulting his Cabinet colleagues, Mr./could avoid a restricted economy 
Bevin will have to take the matter/and resultant restricted political 
up with the Prime Ministers of the/life. 
Dominions, now meeting in London.| Without American help, France 


tence that Germany be considered/controls and trade with the outside) 
as a whole and only after the draft/world only in cases of extreme ne- 
peace treaties with other countries|cessity, it was stated. French sur- 
have been fully discussed. pluses would have to be bartered 

Mr. Bevin, therefore, would like|abroad for heavy capital goods, the 
to have the Byrnes plan deferred|survey predicted, adding that “this| 
until the time comes to take up/is essentially the course that Rus- 
everything connected with Ger-|sia was obliged to take in 1917, 
many. He would not want to sse/and the French are well aware of 
the American proposal discussed/the rigid political restrictions this 
separately, any more than hejtype of economic régime implies.” 
wants the Ruhr and Rhineland) France stands a _ reasonable 
problem to be taken up as @ ques-|chance, with adequate aid through 
tion @ 


erlands have made it very clear in|importers of the world, since Ger- 
the strongest possible terms that}/many will have been eliminated as) 


POINTING THE WAY TO PEACE 


Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov and Secretary of State|{lavor of the desert, with a notice- 


y French Foreign Minister Georges 


Bidault in Paris yesterday. In the center is V. N. Paviev, interpreter. 


Associated Press Radiophote 


DISCUSSES BROWDER TRIP! 


His Passport Ie Good for Russia,| 
Acheson Says 


Special to Twe New York Times 
WASHINGTON, April 30—Dean 
Acheson, Acting Secretary of 
State, sail today that a passport 
had been issued to Earl Browder 


thé | good for Russia. He made the state- 


ment at a;news conference in view 
of Mr. Btowder’s own statement 
to the press in Sweden that he was 
going to the Soviet Union. Ordi- 


|| Above all, there is British insis-|would have to maintain economic|narily passport information is held|that. The 


in confidénce by the State De- 
ent. 

The passport also waz validated, | 
according to Mr. Acheson, to cer- 
tain pther:countries that Mr. Brow- 
der said h@ wanted to visit on com- 
mercial matters in connection with 
a new business he had formed. 


U.S. Ship Aground Off Bermuda 
By Cable te Tus New Youx Towes. 
HAMILTON, Bermuda, April 30) 


erty ship Ida Staus, which ran 
aground off St. George's at day- 


lplace jeweled crowns on the heads 


lwhich has 25,000 of its own. 


OF TRANS-JORDAN| ARRIVE IN BERLIN 


‘Coronation’ on May 25 to Be|Wiver and Children Hailed in 
Simple Rite—Arab Legion | Poignant Reunions—Amazed 
to Provide the Color at Beauty of Country 


By FATHLEEN McLAUGHLIN 
By Wireless to Tes New Youn Pocus. 


ceived independence after twenty-|for this first contingent of service 

years as a mandated territory|families from the United States 
to artive in the European Theatre 
of Operations, surged toward the 
coaches, out of whose windows 
hung their equally excited nearest 
and dearest. 

A brass band that had patiently 
toted its instruments through the 
last five hours swung into a wel- 
coming medley, but hardly anyone 
was conscious of this final flourish 
to their wearying journey from 
Bremerhaven, 

Fatigue was forgotten as babies 
and bags were snatched up and 
borne to waiting vehicles, and the 
weary travelers began the last lap 
of their eleven-day journey to their 
future homes in this unfamiliar 
land, so lately sinister but which 
had extended to them so reassur- 
ing a welcome. 

Nothing could daunt them. They 
ooked beyond the bomb-blasted 
cities and exclaimed at,the beauty 
of thé countryside. And they de- 
clared they would be happy here. 


y 
is literally at his feet, will be 
mies apropos pat 
ea appro 
the earth, but different from any 
the average person associates with 
coronations, They will have the 


able absence of plush, scarlet and 
ermine. 

In fact, it will not be a corona- 
tion at all in the accepted sense 
becausé Mosiems do not. believe in 
coronations ‘n which high digni- 
taries of a church officiate and 


of monarchs, And there will be no 
crown, the actual transition from) 
Emir to King will consist merely) 
of reading of a proclamation by) 
the Premier woe | a reception at), 
the Emir’s palace here. There will! 
be no outward peg except that 
“His Excellency” will suddenly be- 
come “His Majesty.” 

After the treaty of independence Bint tee ed mags tye Bm 
signed in London has been ratified,|i,4:ed out to find a strange spec- 
all that will be necessary is for the/tacie confronting them across the 
Trans-Jordan Legislative Assem-|piatform, A dingy line of boxcars 
bly to wave its wand and proclaim haited directly opposite was teem- 
the Emir a King. It is as simple 88\ing with the curious faces of chil- 
rest will be carried out/qren and women, 
by Premier Ibrahim Pasha Hashim) :oyether with a few half-grown 
neighboring States stand by watch- impassive countenances, in con- 

: trast to the well-dressed happy 

The day itself, the beginning of/group in the de luxe coaches, 

a three-day celebration, is going tO) aroused mutual curiousity. 


be one of great joy for Arabs. Victor and Vanquished 


From all over the East they will 
converge on this little valley town,| Here were the victor and van- 
quished—persons expelled from Si- 
On Amman’s day of days the|lesia being returned to. their 
pidce de résistance will be a mag-|fatherland, who had been en route 
nificent colorful parade and review|since Thursday in these sad ac- 


part. transition, of emerging as one of|—-There seemed to be a slight pros-\of Trans-Jordan’s fabulous Arab|/commodations, They were headed 
Moreover, Belgium and the Neth-|the three principal exporters and/pect of freeing the American Lib-|Legion, headed by the renowned|for unknown destinations among 


Blubb Pasha, who developed it into|Germans whose ways and whose 


one of the greatest desert armies|ianguage most of them had for-| 
gotten. And they would be be- 


oid and young, ir 


COOL 


PRINTED 
ELEGANCE 


banded with color 


Exquisitely simple... the 
figure flattering lines of this 
cooly textured, pale-lit rayon 
crepe, daisy and scroll printed 


with contrasting color 
combinations. Navy and yellow—black and blue—black 


and red—brown and white—14 to 40. 49.95 
WOMEN'S DRESS SALON 


Mee? "Tailored Womazs 


SUGENE K. DENTON, PRES. 
@ © © © © 42 FIFTH AVE, AT 37 ST. NEWYORK 19,NY. @ o ee 4 


they feel that no decisions should/a major trading nation, Mrs. Had-|break today. Carrying 8,000 tons/of all time. He is a British Army 


GINGER veer. 125 


All at 73 Proof 


i goto? SLOE GIN 
| 


Prothy end Pleverty! 


ae 
| 


* BIG FOUR RULE OUT 


ty 
be 





48 Proof 4. 258 


aot” 100 PROOF 
RYE om 


~Smoorhness ond Teste thet Letisty’” 

Aveilebie ia pe 

% Qt. * % Pin © Y Pts, ta 
At Leading Liquor Stores Everywhere | 


. 4 
; 


(| be made about Germany in general 
‘| and western Germany in particular|welcome addition to the free-trad- 


nai without consulting them. Mr. Bevin|ing world 


> |to make such a request. 


sel said, and might thus prove a 


in which the United! 


agrees that they have every right|States hopes to find the classic 
solution of a stable world economy. 


sent it before the Ministers 
through a delegation. On this 
point, Mr. Byrnes referred to the 
interested-parties clause of the 
Potsdam accord. But the Aus- 
trians must reconcile themselves 
to the fact that they have lost 
most of South Tyrol, despite the 
recent Innsbruck demonstrations 
asking for it. 


AUSTRIA'S DEMAND 


Continued From Page 1 


of coal for Le Havre, the ship 
headed for Bermuda after leaving 
Charleston, N. C., to land Seaman 
Charlies Tyler, who is suffering 
from an ulcer on his leg. 


‘officer who, like his predecessor 
Lawrence, tamed the desert tribes 
land organized them into an inte- 
grated fighting force, and now has 
lthem in the palm of his hand. 
More than 2,000 of these troops 
will parade across the Amman air- 
idrome in “advancing review order” 
land will be inspected by King Ab- 
dullah. 


FOUR RUSSIAN SHIPS HERE 


stances then prevailing did not in- 
fluence the operation.” The Brit- 
ish said they treated the Rodlich 
census with the “greatest reserve," 
contending that the professor) 
sought to organize it to support! 
Marshal Tito’s c!aims. 

Philip Mosely, the United States 
member of the commission, wrote) 





Minesweepers Built by Canada 


grudged both for their living unset 
and for the food they would eat. 

And the cherished womenfolk 
of the Americans, bound for com- 
fortable lives and homes even amid 
strangers, were secure and smiling | 
because their husbands, brothers 
and fathers at a tremendous sacri- 
fice had won their security agains 
exactly such a fate. r| 

Everywhere they turned, these 
|American women and _ children 
|were sated with attention and 
pampered with gifts, emphasizing 
the warmth of feeling that their 
pioneer status generated. Mothers 


Our Polo 


Success 


Return of a com 


queror .. . Spring's 
mighty polo success 


of the Rodlich census that it “does 


Are En Route to Black Sea 


with small tots on their hands had 


coat, of lusciously 


not possess the objective and aci- 
entific qualities which would allow} 
it to give any great weight.” But 
the Soviet report complains bit- 
terly about the Italian census of 
1921 and praises the 1945 census, 
adding that “for determining the) 
jnational composition of Istria the! 
census of 1945 furnishes the most 
correct urderstanding.” 


The last four of ten minesweep-| helpers galore. 
ers built for the Russian Navy by ey asked endless questions 
|\Canada at Vancouver, B. C., as/about living conditions, expressed | 
part of a “mutual ald agreement,” |amazement at the extent of the 
jaccording to the Navy Public In-|amusement and comforts they! 
formation Office here, arrived|could anticipate, admitted thetr| 
yesterday at Pier 9, Staten Island.|antipathy to fraulein competition! 
The ships, which came here via/for the American girls back home, 
the Panama Canal, will remain ————— te z, would ae 
; two days to take on fuel and pro- | #/ong rmans an 

The four lines recommended by| visions before leaving for Halifax |harked back unceasingly to the de- 
ee ee on ee ces split UPland St. Johns, Nfld, and Black light of once more having daddy 
‘really no nearer an agreement. objected much to Mr. Molotov's\with the three Weatern nations 30%, Ports: take over the discipline of the boys 
| The Foreign Ministers have ac-irequest that Rome and Belgrade | awarding Trieste to Italy and Rus-| 1 "*, 126-foot wooden craft,|@nd girls they had not seen for 
«cepted a twenty-eight-page report again send envoys to argue their sia giving the city to Yugoslavia. named the Poplar Lake, Beech | Varying intervals. 

from the commission of experts\cases, Mr, Byrnes wanted to save| rl |Lake, Willow Lake and Spruce en inal a 
*that visited the Italian-Yugoslavitime a a |Lake, were turned over to Russian| Navy pay ls good—and you have 

} ¢ and avoid a repetition of ar De G i to Go te Pari 

* boundary region for twenty-eight/guments heard with parrot-like aeper © te Fare ‘Navy representatives early this|® chance to become a well d 
¢ days, from March 9 through April regularity. ROME, April 30 (P)—The For-|month at Vancouver. Warrant Of-| expert through Navy training. You 

5. The commission investigated) gome thought the deputies|°!sn Office said tonight that Pre- ficer A. G. Meyers of the Roya! °#” now enlist in the Regular Navy 
seven afeas, tncluding five cities) ould receive the new report from|™er Alcide de Gesperi would head|Canadian Navy is aboard one of for two, three, four or six years. 
and twenty-seven towns and vil-|contestants for the disputed area.|® ‘legation prepared to fly tolthe craft as™interpreter and will|Go to your nearest Navy Recruiting 
lages, and appointed an economic|o+nerg recalled that in London|? 8s tomorrow. debark at Halifax. Station. 
subcommittee to visit Fiume, such arguments were heard both 

But this report, contrary t© Pre-| nefore the Council and its deputies. 
vious information, does not ‘really However, Mr. Molotov pointed out 
agree even on many basic factsthat Premier Alcides de Gasperi of 
*\including the value of various Italy and Vice Premier Edward 
¢\censuses taken in the region, and Kardelj of Yugoslavia had been 
ein the end recommends four dif-|4 peters before and that now it 
e\ferent views as to where the fron- might be well to receive the argu- 
e\tier should be drawn. Three Of| nents of locally involved leaders. 

these-—from the United States, 

Britain and France—tend to favor Discussion to Be Limited 
* retention of Trieste by Italy, while} ‘The Italian and Yugoslav dele- 
* the Russian opinion supports Mar-/gations, when they appear on Fri- 
*\shall Tito’s claim for the city. \day, must stick to the lines of the 
four views represented in the pe- 


- 
| YT Frida 
Isoue Put Off Until y culiar commission report and not 


- 
e| All in all, the Trieste and fron )start dragging in lengthy histori- 
e tier discussion lasted until it was)..) phoma - ry ony 
jagreed at 4:30 P. M. to postpone) The commission report is about 
* it until Friday's report by the im-),. confusing as anything can be 
® |terested parties. on this confusing subjeci. It agrees 
° Secretary of State James F |... the instructions by the Min- 
° Byrnes, who has been trying to _ isters to the deputies issued last 
© Austria herself added to ©! Sept. 19, asking for a “report on 
o P ’ 4 po 
® agenda right along, but who hasiin. line, which will in the main be 
failed so far because of Soviet ob-| 1), ethnic line, leaving a minimum 
jections, introduced the subject Of) niger alien rule, on the under- 
the Austrian-Italian border today.| standing that appropriate inves- 
The United States policy on this I8)tieations will be carried out on the 
that “the frontier with Austria) .o5t before the final limitation of 
would not be changed, subject tojin. frontier.” 
a hearing in any case Austria MAY! jis on the same day, Herbert 
eo <j minor rectification IM) y "myatt, Australian Minister for 
er favor. External Affairs, asked for a 
Mr. Byrnes repeated this, but | border west of the Morgan Line 
was hard to get the subject gOINg:| 144 « special economic agreement 
It had been much discussed in Lon- covering coal and bauxite re- 
don by the deputies, who more OF)... .e—° with complete interna- 
less adopted ihe American vieW~|tionalization and demilitarization 
point. Since the Austrian Govern-|.¢ ai) of Trieste—not just the port 
ment has claimed no minor rec-inw Zealand's R. M. Campbell 
tifications, but has on the contrary) ...64 for an ethnic border with a 
asked for the major change Of in-| .enarate Trieste under United Na- 
corporating South Tyrol within| tions control. 
Austria, the Council has agreed) The report also agrees on the 
more less positively to keep mostinasi, facts of the commission's 
of that region Italian. activity in Tarvisio, Resiutta-Ge- 
The Foreign Ministers had ten-|mona-Tarcento, Faedis - Cividale, 
—————-—— tatively agreed at their: London|Gorizia-Cormons, Gorizia - Duino, 
meeting to accept the American|Trieste and western and southern 
a thesis, and this was ratified today.|Istria, and also agrees on the Fi- 
AL A| A chance for Austrian nSiume sub-committee inquiry. But 
er et AED AON) now would develop only {ff theithese facts are the kind of thing a 
REaITAL pay | Vienna Government submitted new| child reads in a history book—that 
' |claims for small alterations. The)Trieste is an important port, or 
Big Four all appear to be that there is a mine in such and 
|that the hydroelectric power in| such a place. 
|Bolzano Province is vital to Italy.| The real argument is over the 
Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevinjvalidity of Italian and Austro- 
\supported Mr, Byrnes when he|Hungarian censuses 1900, 1910, 
brought up the topic, and referred/1921 and Marshal Tito’s cen- 
to a report of experts favoring|sus of 1945, made by Professor| 
‘minor adjustments in favor of|Rodlich of Yugoslav's, “Adriatic| 
|Austria. However, the Ministers|Institute.” The French member of 
jhave never received the report to|the commission concludes that the 
which Mr. Bevin referred and it is|;Rodlich census is inaccurate and 
jup to the Austrians to bring forth)was made by untrained men who 
a new “midor claim.” favored Yugoslav claims, The) 
If Austria does produce such aiFrenchman adds: “It may be 
claim, she will be invited to pre- questioned whetber the circum- 


soft camel's hair 
(30%) and wool in 
the creamy beige of 
spun maple sugar. 
Single or double 
breasted, 10 to 16 
and 9 to 15, 55.96 


DEBUTANTE SHOP 
FOURTH FLOOR 


/ ROCKEFELLER COMTER, &Y | |now is really not making much 
“Quaity Liguers Since 1889” lems. /headway, Mr, Byrnes suggested 
” In a two-and-a-half-hour session 


ki @ teen ca: PEN Py that the Ministers gather twice 
quae ee similar to yesterday's, in which|(eily from now on and this 
the first really scrambled issue—| the 





er merson Compan » chance to have their say on Dan-/ 
He iste and Mediterranean prob-| Realizing that the conference 
baie 


= . % 
‘ 1S ee 
he Bs 


will do, oy at 11:30 
A. M, tomorrow, an hour and one- 

that of the Italian colonies—was). tir ‘atter the deputies meet in 

jtalk was temporarily shelved, the/drart the day's program. 

\Trieste problem at length this aft-|voted to Trieste, and that city will 

jernoon and found themselvesicome up again. Although nobody) 








| . DePinna . 
Mew Yoko /9 


GthMecnue al 52nd Secel 


THE FAMOUS SKY 
GARDENS 


ATOP THE ST. MORITZ 


e a * eg ey ae 


32 floors cbove Centra! Pork, 
with o breethtcking ponoroma 
of the city, the Sky Gardens 
provide on unusvol setting for 
private functions of all types. 
Beovtifully decorated .. . the 
Gordens ore so arranged that 
they ore ideal for 25 or 250 
people. 


Fer details, coll Ext. 217 
Wickersham 2-5800 


$T. MORITZ 


ON-THE- PARK 
50 Central Perk South 


Direction, 3. Gregory Teyler 


oYrpx 


24 WEST 97 


iN YOUR HOME OR OFFICE 


FURNITURE 
& RUGS 
CLEANED 


READY FOR USE IN FEW HOURS TIME 
NO INCONVENIENCE - NOODOR 
Ow approved foam method cleans 
rugs & furniture beautifully. 


Recommended noone firme. 
Phone for pate ESTIMATE, 


WaAtkins 89-4586 


GREAT EASTERN 


FURNITURE & CARPET CLEANING CORP, 
1123 BROADWAY, . ©. 





A 


PRING VIEW of Yo 


IN 100% WOOL GABARDINE 


To share the glory of your new, sensitively tailored suit . . . 
a gaily striped surah gilet with a cascading jabot for color 
flattery. 100% wool gabardine in white wine, grey, light 
blue or gold. Available in sizes from 16 to 16, 

$98.95 


FADY-TO-WEAR SUITS —~- SECOND FLOOR 


CLASSICS* ...... with a ballerina air 


Lilting little shoes you'd half expect to see dancing 
across the stage of the “Met” these days. Dancer (top) 
black suede. Prancer (center) black or russet tan calf, 
Fencer (right) navy, brown, black suede or red calf. 10.95 
Young Second Floor 


AY THORPE 24 WEST 57 comme 


Sorry, no mail or phone orders 


R 
MILGRIM 6 WEST 57TH STREET © Also White Plains 


BEE FFE EE PDO OP Oe 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, 


STALIN IN WARNIN 


GIFT HORSE ARRIVES IN THIS COUNTRY 


RUSSIANS REPORT | 
HOSTILITY IN PARIS 


Anti-Moscow Bloc Is at Work, 
Says Tass—'‘Pessimism’ of 
World Press Attacked 


By BROOKS ATKINSON 
By Wireless to Tas New Yorx Tres 

MOSCOW, April 30—Th.v people 
of Moscow are informed today 
that the world press, including the 
Paris press, maintains an attitude 
of “well-calculated pessimism”| 
and gloom regarding the confer- 
ence of Foreign Ministers in Paris 
and blames Soviet intransigeance 
and intractability for everything. 

“It is not difficult,” the Soviet 
news agency Tass reports “from 
Paris, “to guess the aim of this 
surprisingly orchestrated cam- 
paign. Groups that are inclined 
to impose their wil on other 
countries rather than build rela- 
tions on an equai basis according 
to lawful interests would like to 
put the delegation of the Soviet 
Union in a difficult situation and 
are trying in every way to distort 
her real position.” 

It is reported that Paris news- 
papers, reflecting a mood emanat- 
ing from Washington and Londan, | 


discussing the possibility of a weet | 
stalemate y the Foreign Minis-| Fact, a brown English-blooded stallion, is met by Miss Kathleen 


ters’ conference that might result} Harriman at Baltimore. Fact and his companion, Boston, were at 
in the signing of separate peace) Stalingrad during the siege and later were presented by Generalissimo 
Creaties Foreign Secretary Ernest Stalin to Miss Harriman and her father, W. Averell Harriman, the 
Bevin's stand is reported to be ua- 

ually the same as Secretary “|— ambassador to Soviet Russia. Associated Press Wirephoto 


State James F. Byrnes. Foreign 
Britain but for the whole British 


said, is inclined to compromise. |CANADA BARS BEVIN |Commonwealth.” 
newspaper Izvestia says| AS HER SPOKESMAN mo that correct?” the questioner 


The 
jasked 


that the foreign press has the im- 
pression that the greatest snag at 
Paris is Italian reparations. It is) 
well known, the paper says, that! 
the Soviet Union proposes total! 
reparations cf $300,000,000, of 
which Ruzgsia would get $100,000,- 
000. This is not excessive, Izvestia| 
contends, since the “Allied occupa- 
tional authorities already have 
pumped from Italy a large sum) 


“My understanding,” replied Mr. 
_ Speciel to Tus New Yeas Tusms ling, “is that the Secretary of 


OTTAWA, April 30— Canada |state for Foreign Affairs of the 
speaks for herself and Great Brit-;United Kingdom is representing 
ain speaks for herself in interna-|the United Kingdom and the United 
tional conferences, Prime Minister — — epnlauce from el 
W. L. Mackenzie King informed) .ides of the lng 

the House of Commons today in; Mr. King is still uncertain when) 

reply to a question as to whether/he will be able to go to London | 

— — greater wipe this in| Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin| @nd —— because re ~ a 

> form of expenses of maintain-|,.046 for the whole empire in the| ™entary engagements. n Paris! 

exportation of equipment of. ali/3ig Four meeting in Paris. emall independent nations, lesding 

equipment of all kinds and ma-| .The question was preceded by|a revolt against Big Four domi- 
terials.” jthe quotation of part of « cabled/|nation, 

There is reported to be some|story to THE NEW YORK TIMES es 
criticism in Paris of the British| which stated “it must always be ile qusloyment worries, thirty. | 
and Americans. Mr. Bevin's m0-\xent in mind that Mr. Bevin in| Call at your nearest Navy Recrult- 


tive in opposing the French reso- 
Sabhemn te dhemmnae thie Gieniaien prob |Patia is talking is talking not only for Great! ing Station at once. 


lem is said to be to set Germany| > 
against the Soviet Union, “thereby| 
repeating the fatal mistake 





the Tories made after the first 
World War.” 

Regarding the thorny subject of 
Trieste, Vice Foreign Minister Al- 
lesh Bebler of Yugoslavia is re- 
ported to have stated that “we con- 
sider it would be unjust to demand 
one of the United Nations to give 
up a section of her national terri- 
tory to a former enemy country.’ 

In the opinion of a Tass corre- 
spondent, the success or failure of 
the Parts conference has not been 
predetermined. 

“The conclusion,” he says, “really 
depends entirely on the good-will 
of the participants and their will!- 
ingness to take into consideration 
and understand mutual interests, 
to settle questions not in the spirit 
of forcing the will of certain pow- 
ers but in a spivit of respect of the| 
lawful demands of each partici- 
pant, and to fulfill those obliga- 
tions on the basis of previously 
concluded agreements.” 


U. N. IS WELCOMED 
TO QUEENS BY BURKE 


With the pres Hall and the) 
housing site of the United Nations 
temporarily situated in Queens, 
Borough President James A. Burke 
extended an official welcome to 
Trygve Lie, Secretary General of 


the United Nations, and members 
of his secretariat in a ceremony 
yesterday at Borough Hall. 

Speaking in behalf of the 1,500,-| 
000 residents of Queens, Mr. Burke 
declared that “we want permanent 
peace so badly that we will do any-;* 
thing you ask to aid you in ac- | 
complishing that end.” 

The meeting took place in the| 
Borough President's conference 
room, decorated with the flags of 
the fifty-one United Nations, and 
in the presence of Secretariat offi- 
cials as well as members of Mr. 
Burke's “cabinet” and their fami- 
lic Representatives of the May- 
ors United Nations Committee 
present were Grover Whalen, chair-| 
man; Park Commissioner Robert; 
Moses, City Construction Coordi- 
nator, and Herbert Bayard Swope: 
Borough President James J. Lene 
represented the Bronx. 

Mr. Lie, thanking Mr. Burke for| 
his warm greeting, emphasized | 
that the United Nations was not! 
leaving the Bronx because of any 
lack of weicome. He added that, 
while he could not go into all the) 
reasons for the decision to move to! 
Flushing Meadows and Lake Suc- 
cess, the United Nations “does not! 
like to disturb any individual in) 
this or any country.” 

Reiterating the inviatation that 
has been extended by the city be- 
fore, Mr. Moses expressed the hope 
that, after carefully looking over 
the housing site and the Flushing 
Meadows area, the United Nations 
would eventually decide to “stay 
for good.” 


a +P 


" 


fur storage 


oe Xe ht 


24 WEST $7 


Storage vaults 
on the premises 
Standard rates 


Circle 7-4300 
24 West 57 Street 


| the calamities of war. 


| that 


hee 


OF PLOT FOR WA 


Continued From Page 1 


world do not wish a repetition of 
They fight 
persistently for consdlidation of 
peace and security. 


“In the vanguard of the struggle | 


for peace and security marches 


| the Soviet Union, which -played 
|} an outstanding part in smashing 


| fascism 
mission of liberation. The nations | 


and fulfilled its great 
liberated by the Soviet Union 
from the Fr ist yoke received an 
opportunity of building their state 
life on democratic foundations, of 
realizing their historical aspira- 
tions. On this road they find 


fraternal assistance on the part | 


of the Soviet Union. 
Soviet Might Stressed 


The entire world has had an 
opportunity to convince itself, not 
only of the might of the Soviet 
State, but also of the fairness of 
its policy based on the recogni- 


tion of equality of all peoples, re- 


spect for their freedom and in- 


| dependence. 


There is no reason 
in the future the Soviet 
Union. will be true to its policy, 
the policy of peace and security, 
the policy of the equality and 
friendship of peoples. 

The workers, peasants and in- 
tellectuals of our country re- 
ceived the Five-Year Plan as a 
militant program which corre- 
sponds to their vital interests. We 
may hope that the Soviet people, 
headed by the Communist party, 


, will not spare their strength or | 
efforts in order not only to ful- 


fill but also to over-fulfill the new 
Five-Year Plan. 

Upon the termination of the 
war, the Soviet Uniog started 
peaceful Socialist construction. 
The Soviet people enthusiastical- 
ly set about peaceful constructive 
labor, which had beeen interrupt- 
ed by the war. 
Five-Year Plan of restoration and 
development of the national econ- 
omy of the U.8.S.R. in the period 
from 1946 to 1950, adopted by Su- 
preme Soviet of the U.8S.8.R., 
opens new prospects of further 
growth of the productive forces 
of our country, the growth of 
her economic might, the rise of 
her material welfare and culture 

Developing peacefu! Socialist 
construction, we should not for- 
get for a single minute the in- 
trigues of international reaction, 


dom fond 


ON THE PLAZA + NEW YORK 19 


BERGDORF 
GQODDMAN 


STH AVENUE AT S8TH STREET 





to doubt | 


The law on the | 


| any doubt, 


MAY 1, 
U. N. EVENTS IN BRIEF 


A 

United Nations events: 

10:30 A. M.—The Committee of 
Experts met and continued its 
study of rules of procedure. 

10:41 A. M.—Phe Commission 
on Human Rights opened its 
second meeting with a discus- 
sion of its terms of reference 
and adjourned until 3 P. M. 

2 P. M.—The Temporary Trans- 
port and Communications 
Commission convened and re- 
viewed the basic problems in 
the field with particular refer- 
ence to existing world organ- 
izations. 

2 P. M.--The Economic and Em- 
ployment Commission met and 
discussed what constituted the 
basic problem in the economic 
reconstruction particularly of 
the war-torn nations. 

P. M.—The Commission cn 


Human Rights reconvened for | 


a preliminary discussion of the 


definitive composition of the | 


commission. 

:10 P. M.—The Temporary 5So- 
cial Commission met and, aft- 
er discussing in general terms 
the basic social problems con- 
fronting the world today, ap- 
pointed a subcommittee to 
. draft a provisional policy of 
procedure. 


which is hatching plans of a new 
war. It is necessary to remember 
the teaching of the great Lenin to 
the effect that after switching 
over to peaceful labor, it is neces 
aary to be constantly vigilant, 


protect, as the apple of one's eye, 
the armed forces and defensive 


| power of our country. 


Vigilant “uard Urged 


The armed forces of the Soviet 


Union—our land troopa, air forces 


and navy—discharged their duty | 


to the country in the Great Pa- 
triotic War. Now our armed 
forces are faced with a task of 
no less importance, vigilantly to 
guard the peace which was won 


and the constructive labor of the | 
Soviet people, to be the reliable | 


bulwark of interests of the Soviet 
Union. 


summary - “yesterday's | 


1946. 


! 
| and our aviation will aceomplish 


| all those tasks facing them. 
Comrades, Red Army and Red 
Navy men, sergeants and petty 
officers, comrade officers, gen- 


| erals and admirals, comrade men 


end women workers, peasants, 
men and women, brain workers, 
scldiers demobilized from the 
Red Army, on behalf of the Gov- 
ernment and the Communist 
party I greet and congratulate 
you on the day of the First of 
May. 

To mark the international hol- 
iday of working people, I order: 


Today, May 1, a salute of twen- | 


ty artillery salvos to be fired in 
Moscow, the capital of our coun- 
try and in the capitals of the 
Union Repubiics, also in Lwow, 
Koenigsberg, Khabarovsk, Vladi- 
vostok and Port Arthur, and alsv 
in the hero cities: Leningrad, 
| Stalingrad, Sevastopol and Odessa. 
Long live our valiant forces! 
Long live our glorious Commuvu- 
nist party! Long live the great 
Soviet people! Long live our 
mighty Soviet motherland! 
Minister of the Armed Forces of 
the USSR, Generalissimo of 
the Soviet Union. 
Josten STALIN. 


TT 
—— 


to | 


Let 
Russeks 


remodel 
your furs 


The successful accomplishment | 


of this honorable task is possible 
only on condition of 
growth of military culture and 


military skill of the officers and | 


men of our army, our navy and 
our aviation. The armed forces 
of the Soviet Union must daily 
improve their military art on the 
basis of experience of war, on the 
basis of the progress of military 
science and technique.. Beyond 
our army, our navy 


further | 


Russeks 


Fur Storage 


New York Wi 77-1900 
Brooklyn MA 4-3600 


We've cot a 


A Rope of Precious Furs 


Like a rope of pearls, a rope of precious furs can 
be your most wear-with-everything accessory. We'll 
show you multiple-skin arrangements of natural 
stone martens, priced from 4125 each skin; natural 
baum marten, 4150 a skin; natural Russian sables 
from #300; natural fishers $200 and natural mink 


from '50. Divided payments available. Main Floor. 


Open Thursdays till 9 


corner on the Hobo Coat 


in this corner, ladees and gentlemen, the champ of all light- 


weight champs, the Hobo coat! Leeds coached it until it came 


out with beautiful broad shoulders. handsome wide lapels and 


deep, deep pockets. And Leeds made it in The American Woolen 


Company's suede-soft Duv-down, spiked with a quartet of shin- 


ing switled buttons. We call it Hobo because it goes every- 


where. $35, misses’ sizes, Young Marylin Coats on the Sixth Floor. 


FIFTH AVENUE AT 36th ST., 


NEW YORK 18 + FULTON AND BRIDGE STS., BROOKLYN 1 





6 L++ 


STORE HOURS THURS. 11 A. M.—8 P. M. U.N. PROGRAM FOR TODAY 
The schedule of today’s United 

Nations events: 

10:30 A. M.—The Committee of 
Experts will meet to continue 
the discussion of rules of pro- 
cedure for the Security Coun- 
cll. 

10:30 A. M.—Meetin 
Transport and 
tions Commission 

10:30 A. M.—Meeting 
Statistical Commission 

10:30 A. M.—Meeting of the 
Sub-Commission on the Status 
of Women 

10:30 A. res of the 
Economic and mployment 
Commiasion. 

2:30 P. M.—Meetin 
Transport and 
tions Commission 

2:30 P. M.—Meeting of the 
Sub-Commission on the Status 
of Women. 

2:30 P. M.—Meetin 
Economic and 
Commission 


TOWN IN GERMANY 
SOUGHT BY CZECHS 


Big Four Get Claim on Glatz, 
Long-Disputed Silesian 
Giass, Textile Center 


By LANSING WARREN 

Ry Wireless to Tue New Youn Time 
PARIS, April 30-—One develop- 
ment on the sidelines of the Big) 
Four Conference is a claim on Ger-| 
many recorded today with the For- 
eign Ministers by Wavro Hajdu,' 
|special. diplomatic envoy from’ 
|\Czechoslovakia with the rank of 
|Minister. 
| He deposited with the delega- 
Bi tions a memorandum justifying 
Czech claims to the town and dis-| 
itrict of Glatz, Silesia, and to cer- 
tain other adjustments along the 

Czech-German frontier. 

The Czechs, as long ago as the 


intr debands against Hungry ja} OAc eS Reo DEAT 
| CLOSES ALL CASINOS 


a memorandum to the Ministers’) 
By Wireless to Tue New Youu Times 


of the 
ommunica- 


of the 


of the 


of the 
mployment 


iideputies. Mr. Hajdu emphasized 
today that his mission here had 
nothing to do with this and that 
he had come here, not to present 
a request for discussion by the President Enrico Gaspar 
Conference, but to safeguard Closed all casinos today, depriving 
Czechoslovakia's claims in case a this city of almost $5,000,000 year- 
general European territorial revi- jy revenue derived from gambling 
jsion should come before the Con- ang putting out of work almost 
ference. 70,000 people. 


The principal claim relates to 
Glatz, which is a center of glass The unexpected step was made 


nmmunica- 


TANGIBR BOOMING, 
UNSCARRED BY WAR 


Strategic City, Regarded as a 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


ness men here about local prob-; 
lems. They claim that the French,| 
with four votes in the Assembly, 
plus six votes for the natives (who 
vote in accordance with the views 
of the Sultan of Morocco, who in| 
turn ls controlled by the French 
resident Rabat) and. the support 


Shangri-La, Little Changed lot the Belgians, run the zone in 


by Franco Occupation 


| 
| 

By THOMAS J. HAMILTON 
| By Wireless to Tus New Yoax Tints 

TANGIER, April 28 (Delayed) -— 
If James Hilton had known 
Tangier, he would not have had to 
think up some imaginary country 
ifor his Shangri La. 

The Mediterranean cruise of the 
U. 8. 8. Missouri has taken us to 
Turkey, which waa spared actual 
war but lives in constant fear of 
jher powerful Russian neighbor; 
and to Greece, Italy and Algeria, 
jall of which show the material and 
jmoral scars of bitter fighting and 
‘none of which is making much 
| progress in recuperating. This, our 
final call, brought the Missouri to a 
icity of 100,000 that with its tiny 
hinterland, amounts to just 225 
square miles that has been un- 


their own interests. 

In other words, it is claimed 
that the French favor prohibi 
tariffs on goods that interfere wi 
trade in French Morocco and - 
erally impede the development of 
Tangier. Increased interest by 
both the United States and Britain 
would be welcomed. 

Meanwhile Tangier is doin 
very well. Manufactured goods sti 
are not plentiful, but American’ 
and British manufacturers are 
vying with each other to supply| 
the needs, probably as a means of 
“showing the flag.” and every-| 
thing from English woolens to) 
French perfumes to American 
breakfast foods can be found in| 
the shops. . 

Licenses are required for the ex-| 
portation of any considerable 
amounts of foodstuffs, but other- 
wise that is the nearest approach 
yet found to the pre-Hitler world,| 
when one took in and brought out! 


touched by war and has virtually|4% much money as one liked and 


no problems for the future. 
Even the seizure of Tangier by 


as the Spanish Fascists inflicted on 
their own country, and Generalis- 
\simo Franco had to abandon this 
small beginning of his dreams of 
|“‘imperio” last Oct. 7. Since then 
an international administration 
jheaded by Admiral Magalhaes 
|\Correia of Portugal has taken com- 


and textile industries, and has been| because gambling was taking away plete charge. 


a subject of dispute between Bo-\the hard-earned money of many 


hemia and Germany for centuries. | citizens who could not afford it. Po. | 
After 200 years of Ger manization, iitically, the measure has another France was collapsing, that Gen- 


inhabitants, 


it is claimed, the 
are aspect. 


though German nationals, 
largely Bohemian by blood. 


The Czech claims were set forth for municipalities, state assembiies 
During the Preai-| months, 
ethnic and economic considerations. | 4ontia) campaign that elected Gen-. 


in a memorandum based on both and governors. 


The population was described as 
predominantly Czechoslovak. In ad- 
dition to Glatz, the Czechs are ask-|Eduardo Gomes, declared that, 
ing for a small coal-producing | elected, he would close all gam- 
basin and for a strip of territory pling places. General Dutra never 
over which Czechoslovakia is plan-|promised any such thing. The 
ning to construct a canal connect- measure may bring a strong reac- 
ing the DanGbe with the Oder. tion. 

The Czech Minister,, however, Jt may also be used by the Com- 
will be content to get his memoran-|munists, who, though they con- 
dum on the record for eventual/qemned gambling, will now take 
discussion, With Jindrich Nozek,\the stand that the Government 
the resident Minister here, he! must care for the 70,000 people 
called on Foreign Minister Vya-\wng may go hungry or at least 
= M. Molotov and, in an hour| wit) suffer privations until they are 


leral Dutra, his opponent Brig. Gen. 


interview, submitted the memoran- 

dum with the Czech viewpoint on —_— ye are angry be- 
jcontral European and Balkan set-| suse the police canceled their li- 
Cements. cense for a mass-meeting sched- 
uled for tomorrow. The police act- 
ed after they had discovered and 
arrested several citizens and for- 
eigners who were directing Com- 
munistic organizations and were 
not registered. 


CORDUROY GOES SHORTY THIS SPRING pr ~b' 
| WAFDISTS LOSE SENATE 


13.95 |Egyot’s Majority Party Wins 


| f 174 Seat 
What could be better . . Only 53 © Seats | 


more comfortable t By Cable to Tee New Youx Times | . 
mote versatile than his CAIRO, Egypt, April 30—The!| Truman Gets Hero’s Autograph 


well known Cheney cor- ‘nationalist Wafd, although it claims} WASHINGTON, April 30 
durey short coat ‘all | to be Egypt's majority party, now | President Truman reversed things 
ready to con your new ‘has lost control of the Senate as|today and got the autograph - a 
> new national commander of the 
suits and dresses for | well as the Chamber of Deputies. 


S 1s | The result of Sunday's elections) Army and Navy Legion of Valor, 
pring and. coo ummer in forty-two Senatorial constit-|Leon Drombowski of Williamaville, 
evenings. 


juencies finds that the Wafd now!N, Y. Mr. Drombowski signed a 

| has only fifty-three out of 174 seats|brochure on the fifty-seven-year 
GREY... BLUE... GREEN ...RED... BROWN 
Mail and phone orders. State second 


in the Senate, although it may gain| history of the Legion, which is re- 
Basernent Coats. . 


CUS 


FASHION 
BASEMENT 


more in the five run-off elections|stricted to holders of high awards 
to be held next Sunday or in the/for heroism. President Truman was 
Senatorial appointments that King)invited t6 a Legion reunion at Buf-) 
Farouk will make soon on rec-ifalo June 21 to 24, but did not 
ommendations ot the Government.'think he could make it 


rnold constable 


Sizes 12-18. 
color choice. 


Add 12 shipping charges beyond our regular delivery ares 
STERN'S FASHION BASEMENT, 41 WEST 42d ST., MW. Y. 18, LO. 6-0000) oe 
Gummmmmmes FOR SAFE FUR STORAGE CALL PE 6-508Osmmmmmmmmmme | 
BROOKLYN 


NT © NEW YORK » 


Occupied in June, 1040 
Tt was June 14, 1940, just as 


jeraliasimo Franco's Moorish troops 


Brazil will soon have elections occupied the international zone on 


'a pretext of maintaining order. 
|Gradually during the next few 
as Axia fortunes pros- 
red, Generalissimo Franco abol- 
shed the international administra- 


if tion, made the peseta sole legal 


itender and applied the laws of 
\Spanish Morocco. 

But Generalissimo Franco not 
jonly did not dare to annex Tangier 
formally, but did not interfere with 
the operation of the mixed tribunal! 
jto which all citizens of countries 
that established the zone—includ- 
jing France, Britain, Belgium and 
the Netherlands—have the right to 
appeal cases from the local courts. | 

¢ British: also succeeded in get-| 
ting his pledge not to fortify this) 
icity that is so strategically sit-' 
uated acrosg the Strait from Gib-| 
raltar, and he placed only a few! 
machine guns around the harbor) 
vw the illusion of armed might. | 

hat was more important, Gen-| 
éralissimo’ Franco's officials tried 
to make Tangier a show window 
of fascist efficiency and tolerance 
The secret police usually did not 
jinterfere with non-Spaniards, who 
in any case retained the right to) 
appeal to the mixed tribunal; most) 
Spanish Republican refugees fled 
in time to French Morocco. | 


Little Anti-Semitism ' 


Nor did the Falangistas, despite 
the anti-Semitism that Generalis- 
simo Franco copied from Adolf) 
Hitler, make much trouble for Jew-| 
ish refugees here 

During the years when the poor! 
of Spain were starving Tangier) 
was provided with excellent sup-! 
plies of rice, olive oil and other 
foods. 

There is discontent among busi- 





Fifth Ave. at 40th, N.Y. 16 * New Rochelle * Hempstead * Open Thursdays ‘til 9 


ecorated 
for 
distinguished 
Spring 


service 


- +. with two bows 
embroidered high 
on the jacket 
that broadens 
the shoulders 
and diminishes 
your waistline .. 
Gray all wool 


49.95 


(one Priest 


NEW YORK (18) + | WEST 39th STREET 
BROOKLYN (2) * 1S HANOVER PLACE 


FEET ACHE?—= 
Give 'em A Break 


Weer Keres Adjustable Arch Seppert 
—~and make walking « pleasure 


Write ler Circaler 


KEYS ARCH SUPPORT CO. 


ittl 6th Ave., opp. Badie City 


take the lou road 


| 

in paradise and you'll be in 

for excitement * low and lovely are 
| 
| 


these paradise shoes with flat-as-a-pancake 
patty heels + and their swirl straps would make 


clementine’s size 9-foot look small * black suede, 


| Pablie Rooms 


for meetings, banquets, socials, 
card parties, weddings. Reason 
able rates. 


HOTEL WESTOVER 


Tied Mi. & West Led Ave. EMdicott 2.0600 


black patent leather * 4 to 10, AAAA to C. shoe salon, 


by 


Z 
red calf or “Sn 


street floor 


8.95 


\ 


traded with whom one pleased. The 
food here is not only plentiful, but 


RIO DE JANEIRO, April 30—|Generalissimo Francisco Franco in|'t i# the best found since the 
Dutra|1940 did not do as much damage/| Missouri left New York. 


Italians to Get Visas for U. §. 
By Wireless to Tux New Yoru Tiwas. 

ROME, April 30—American con- 
sular authorities in Italy will give 
immigration visas beginning y 
1, the United States Consulate 
General in Naples announced to- 
day. The American consulates in 
Genoa, Naples and Palermo will! 
jaccept applications of individuals 
residing in northern, central and) 
jsouthern Italy, respectively. The) 
jannouncement warned that visas| 
|would be granted only in cases 
where transport to the United 
States has been secured. 


Investigate the opportunities ot | 
the peacefime Navy. Go to your 
nearest Navy Recruiting Station! 
at once. Do it today. 


— —— 


Overnight Bag 


Compect carry-ail for pullmen trips or a Orief visit te town or country! 
Overnight beg, lined in rayor 

moire with a weshaedie, plastic 

overtay to guard against 

cosmetic spetse. Gturdily meade in 

fine leather with gold-pieted 

stee! looks. 14% "x Li” x 5% 

in Black or brown goetekin, $60 


naturel pigskin, $57.50 


Prices include 20% Federai Tex. 


BSTABLISHED 1410 


BLACK, STARR & GORHAM 


PTH AVENUE AT 40m STREET. NEW YORK 19. LY 


WHITE PLAINS 


Date BESHAR Plaga 400 


FOR BETTER 


BEST & CO. 


tailored 


stripe 


New, wearable dresses 
in the clean-cut 
stripes that are so 
becoming, so smart 
for summer. 


Second Floor 


liahe washable 


rayon by Evertast 


Sunmere — 
mh &@ Cap- 
sleeve dress with pearly but- 
tons. Sizes 10 to 18 in grey, 


blue, 


with white stripes 


yellow 


19.95 


green, pink 


Striped rayon jersey with new 


long sleeves 
green, b 
25.00. 


10 to 20. 


White with 


own or navy 


red, 


Sizes 


Best & Co. 


Fifth Ave. at 35th St., New York 18, N. Y 


Bronuville 


East Orange 


Copyright, Best & Co., Inc., 


Garden City Rye Stamford White Plains 


(EE 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


SHIPPING CONTROL 
BYOKES U.N. DEBATE 


Conflict With Free Competition 
Cited in Commission Dispute 
—4 World Bodies Studied 


U.N./SSPAIN INQUIRY 
COMMENCES TODAY 


Continued From Page 1 
against Generalissimo Francisco 


& 


FORMER FIRST LADY HEADS UNITED NATIONS COMMITTEE 


and nature of evidence that would 
be required to substantiate the as- 
sertions made principally by the 
Governments of Poland, Russia, 
France and Mexico. 


Only Brazil Has Normal Ties 


Four of the five nations rep- 
resented on the subcommittee 
either do not themselves maintain 
diplomatic relations with the pres- 
ent Spanish regime, or are ready to 
break diplomatically with General- 

*lissimo Franco. They are Australia, 
Poland, China and France. Brazil 
alone among the investigators 
maintains normal and friendly dip- 
lomatic relations with Spain, al- 


“ though there were difficulties 
It is titi hich 
services “— po ea nto a fs Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt with the members of the Economic and Social Council's Commission on Human|hetween the two countries recently 
and not organization,” he told his| Rights. Left to right: Dr. P. J. Schmidt, secretary; Dr. C. L. Hala, China; K. C. Neogy, India; Mrs./when the Spaniards named an Am- 


colleagues. “We should get back) Roosevelt, chairman; Henri Laudier, Assistant Secretary General of social affairs, France; Nicolai Kriukov,|>assador unsatisfactory to Brazil 


to free competition again and gov- " and he wag not permitted to enter 
ernments should not interfere ex- Russia, and Dusen Brkich of Yugesiavie. . as Rio de Janeiro, 


cept where absolutely necessary.” ua cin In the meeting this afternoon the 
is fundamental idea, he added, ainst German civilians, and were| demonstrations. e urg e\investigatory subcommittee js ex- 
should underlie every activity. 4,000 LANDSBERG JEWS against Ge on a hunger strike.|Landsberg group to cooperate with|pected to decide whether it should 
Brig. Gen.-Sir H. Osborne Mance BEGIN HUNGER STRIKE Only oné had to be in prison; the|/the United States Army and avoid/work in New York or attempt to 
of the United Kingdom was nineteen others had asked to be|/new demonstrations. go to Spain or France. It is not 
elected chairman. He emphasized PSR Y VEE Before officials were forbidden|probable that Spain would admit 
the importahce of carrying out! LANDSBERG, Germany, Aprillarrest of the one. to discuss the trouble, Dr. Royjan investigating committee s0 
sanctions imposed by the Security| 30 (P)—Four thousand Jews in| Camp authorities expected hun-|Srole, UNRRA welfare director,/heavily weighted with representa- 
Gouncil. ‘ [the United Nations Relief and Re-| ger to’ end the wholesale strike,|said that the morale of residents|tives of governments that do not 
For Separate Advisory Unit | h#bilitation Administration's dis-|probably by night. One member of |of the Landsberg camp and camps|recognize her. 
placed-persons’ camp went on &\9 four-man displaced-persons’ com-|throughout Bavaria had been; No outside witnesses are ex- 
Rather than organization, hejhunger strike today, but, after|mittee said, however, that the|broken by the sight of Germansipected to be called today. Dr. 
noted, it would require the sus-|hours of demonstrations and revile-'strike would continue with the ob-|living in comfort 
pension of transportation and com-|ment of American soldier guards, ject of saving the men in jail from|ing automobiles and eating fresh|representatives of the Spanish 
munication facilities by ordersitension abruptly subsided and mili-|being tried. The committee an-|meat and vegetables, while their|Government in Exile are in New 
transmitted to the member nstions.|tary authorities seid that they|nounced that it had asked the Cen-|victims, a year after their libera-|York and doubtless would like an 
He suggested a separate adviscry/expected no further trouble. tral Committee for Liberated Jews/|tion, were still living in camp, andjopportunity to testify but they 
group to be named to counsel the) The strike began at breakfast,|in Bavaria to call protest demon-|there was no immediate prospect/may have to submit their evidence 
Military Staff Committee on sanc-|when a spokesman anounced: “All|strations throughout Bavaria to-|that their lot would be improved./through a friendly power such as 
tions and noted that some world|4 9090 of us will not work oP eat|morrow. Poland or Mexico. 
organizations were opposed to the until our twenty comrades are re-| However, Dr. Zalman Grindberg,| For new scenes—join the United) The committee has the author- 
NS CE ERRORS, } from Landsberg prison,|chairman of the committee in|States Marines. Single men 11-26,ity to decide, too, whether it will 
George Baker, United States ex-| where Hitler wrote ‘Mein Kampf.’ "|Munich, conferred two hours with|serve with the — corps of\take evidence from representa- 
pert, former colonel on the Gener-imng twenty were being held in| Army authorities and said that he|Leathernecks. Apply 
a! Staff Corps and once on the fac-|-onnection with Sunday's riots'would not call for Bavaria-wide' Ave. 


ulty at Harvard University, sug- Saar 
Open Thursday till 9) 


By MORRIS KAPLAN 


A conflict of basic economic phi- 
losophies highlighted the opening 
three-hour session yesterday of the 
temporary Transport and Commu- 
nications Commission of the United 
Nations Economic and Social Coun- 
cil when its shipping expert, Leif 
Hoegh of Norway, raised the ques- 
tion of free competition as opposed 
to inter-governmental control. 

In the shippirg field, he said, 
private enterprise served the inter- 
ests of all concerned far better 

an centralized agencies under 
governmental control, 


locked up as a protest against the 


gested that sanctions might be co- 
ordinated by a separate body in 
Tight relationship with the United! 
Nations, retaining, however, a 
loose ‘relationship with the organi- 
gation. 

Alfonso Grez of Chile and Jiri 
Velkoborsky of Czechoslovakia, 
who was elected vice chairman, 
were the other experts present. 


Four Organizations Studied | 


Adopting rules of procedure and_| 
@ provisionsi agenda, the group 
opened discussions of four world) 
organizations: the Provisional In-| 
ternational Civilian Aviation Or- 
ganization, with headquarters at) 
Montreal; the United Maritime) 
Consultative Council, a temporary | 
body slated to go out of existence! 
Oct. 31; the International Tele-| 
communications Union and the) 
Universal Postal Union. 

Mr. Hoegh pointed out that the! 
Maritime Consultative Council, a} 
branch in the United Kingdom and 
the United Nations Relief and Re-| 
haibilitation Adr. ‘nistration ship-| 
ping body are the only interna-| 
tionaF councils in the field and with) 
no executive power. After Oct, 31,| 
he s id, it was not known what! 
would happen in the international! 
shipping field. 

Private shipping organizations) 
existed between wars, he asserted.| 
The general opinion, Mr. Hoegh| 
added, was that free competition 
should govern shipping. That view 
must be the commission's also, he! 
emphasized. In reply to a question) 
by Mr. Baker, Mr. Hoegh declared! 
that non-governmental] bodies) 
worked well and that little inter- 
state action seemed necessary. | 


——_— 





» 


. 


f Eranklingy 





ee 

rnold constable. 
fifth ave. at 40th, n. x. 16) 
new rochelle ¢ hempstead 
| 


open thursdays ‘til 9 





She recommends herself 
to the sophisticated 
flattery of the black 
Town Topper, 

done here in reyon and 
cotton faille with 
swoosh-up sleeves and 
STYLED by rippling back. 10 to 16. 
DEVONSHIRE Misses’ Coats, 


Fifth Floor. 





a RIORDAN rayon 
shantung dress, soundly 
fashion-wise for teens * 
roundly scalloped with 
white embroidery on 
the capelet sleeves and 


han success dress 


hip pockets * luggage, 


pink or green * Reg. U. S$. Pat. OFF, 


sizes 9 to 15, 8.30 


girls’ shop. se-ord floor 
+ 


our Ties 


Franco, and deciding upon the type! 


gown, 7.95 


tives of the Franco regime, but | 
there was doubt last night that it| 
would wish to accord any recogni- 
tion to the Government even by 
summoning it as a defendant. | 

It is probable that the United! 
States, British and Soviet Govern-| 
ments will have a considerable 


jvolume of evidence to piace before 
the committee. Most of this was 
captured in Germany or Italy dur- 
ing the war and establishes that 
Generalissimo Franco was ready to 
get in the war on the side of the 
Axis as long as he thought the 
Germans were winning but only if 
he received certain political and 
territorial concessions at the ex- 
pense of the Allies. 

The Soviet press and radio gave! 
prominent display yesterday to) 
captured German documents re- 
lating a secret protocol between 
the Germans and the Spanish, 
signed in February, 1943, d- 
ing that if Germany sent icient 
equipment, Spain would fight the! 
United Nations if they invaded the 
Iberian Peninsula or entered Span- 
jish territory in Africa. There was, 
however, nothing new in the Mos- 
cow dispatch, except that the Rus- 
sian papers belatedly had pub- 
lished a document textually identi- 
cal with that included in the 
United States White Paper of| 
March 4 as Document No. 14. 


POLE A DIRECTOR IN U. N. 


| 
| 
| 
j 


| 
i 


Moderow will Act for Secretary | 


on League of Nations Assets | 


Wlodzimierz Moderow, of Poland,| 
wes yesterday appointed the rep-| 
resentative of Trygve Lie, Secre-| 
tary General of the United Na-| 


tions, on all United Nations ques-| 


of the Le e of Nations. 

Mr. Moderow, whose appoint- 
ment becomes effective May 15,) 
wil have the rank of director and) 
wil reside at Geneva. He was one) 
of the Polish delegates to the Unit-| 
ed Nations. General Assembly and 
chairman of the United Nations, 
negotiating committee on the) 
League of Nations assets. | 


le homes, driv-|Fernando de los ‘Rios and other/tions arising out of the oo] 


B. ALTMAN «& CO. 


Suppert the Greater New York Fand 


L + 7 


B. ALTMAN @& CO. 


THE CALENDAR SAYS 


worm, wetthey ehund, 


IT’S TIME FOR 


ALTMAN FUR STORAGE 


call MU. 9-7000, or bring your furs te 
Altman Fur Storage in our third floor fur salon. 


if you live in Westchester, call White Plains 9808 


if you live in New Jersey, call ORange §-3000 


GOWNS AND ROBES OF BEMBERG’S*“DREAM GLO” RAYON 


an enchanting sheer fabric that falls so beautifally in graceful folds, 


Soft pastel colors... shell pink, blae or white .. 


in lingerie pretty enough fer a bride. 


Sizes 32 to 38. 


plice bodice. Sizes 32 to 38. 


coat, 18.95 


left: Mondaine’s midriff gown appliqued with rayon satin bows. 


right: coat and gown set trimmed with lace by Elyria. Gown has sum 


complete, 26.90 


Altman lingerie, second floor 





GALLERIES 


of 
GIMBEL 
BROTHERS 


33rd Street and Broadway 
11th Floor 


NOW ON EXHIBITION 
daily 10 to 6 


PERIOD FURNITURE 
Paintings * 


Textiles © 


Decorations 
Books 
Collection of Original 
Plaster Casts by 
Thorwaldsen 
Property of 
Mrs. CHARLES VAN NEST 
Maplewood, N. J. 
Mrs. F. E. LOWELL 


Concord, Massachusetts 


and others 


PUBLIC AUCTION SALE 
Saturday, May 4, at 2 p. m. 


Bales cowiucted by L. 4. Craco, 
R. A. Kende and T. J. Muldoon. 


LIFE INSURANCE LOAN | 


Existing loans refinanced 
and new loans made 
against the loan value 
of life insurance policies 
at low interest rates. 


We attend to ail detoils. 
Ne Brokerage — Neo Service Fees. 


HUDSON COUNTY 
NATIONAL BANK 


Member Federal Reserve 
Federe! Deposit Insurance 


the Noe x 


L, AUGIER BIDS IJ. N. French Jurist Now Here 


To Aid U. N. Committee 


| 


By C. BROOKS PETERS ' i ws 
The Commission on Human | i 

Rights of the Economic and Social 
|\Council of the United Nations 
‘should draw up an international 
‘bill of rights and, when recom- Six — 
|mending {ts adoption by the Coun- Byte < | 
‘cil, simultaneously request au- , 


thority continuously to supervise 
its implementation throughout the 


world, Henri Laugier of France, 


Assistant Secretary General in 

jcharge of Social Affairs, told the 

jcommission at its afternoon ses- | 
sion at Hunter College yesterday. 
_ M. Laugier expressed this view 
|when asked for comment by Mra. 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, commission 
chairman, during a discussion of 
the term of office that the present 
nuclear commission sould recom- 
mend for delegates to the perma- 
nent commission, Mrs. Roosevelt,, René Cassin of the French Coun- 
in asking M. Laugier for his inter-|cil of State, which is the nearest 
pretation of the commission's func-| equivalent in France to the United 
tions, said she disagreed with Dr.| States Supreme Court, arrived yea- 
Cc. L. Hasia’s statement that the|terday at La Guardia Field from 


Rene Caasin 


Ni work of the commission might in-| Paris on the Taj Mahal, Transcon- 
and Western Air C-54) 


jclude such a supervisory respon-|tinental 
| sibility. Skymaster. M. Cassin is a mem- 
___ This revolutionary suggestion of|/ber of the Human Rights Commit- 
\M. Laugier that the commission|tee of the United Nations Economic 
jreceive a power that no similar|and Social Council. 


iVUan siMbo, 


tion to whether members should 
represent ‘governments or be cho- 
sen irrespactive cf nationality be- 
cause of expert qualifications. 

The delngates generally agreed 


OVER EMPLOYMENT 


kept amail, with eighteen mem-|S0Me Europeans Ask Stress 
bers, all t-eligible for reappoint-| on Rebuilding and Stability 


t, and designated for 
ier three — : —Cite Lack of Workers 


a 


REVIVALOF EDUCATION SN lg Ae 
IN EUROPE ADVOCATED - ruined industries ind trans- 


rtation of the invaded countries 


Dr. Herpert Davis, president of/'* ® more important and urgent 
Smith College, called upon the Problem than obtaining interna- 
American: academic world last/tional full employment as stipu- 
night to d> “more than its share’ |!ated in the United Nations Char- 


in the coming years, He declared ‘er, in the opinion of scme of the 
that it we's the duty of American anne y Beant, a menage and Em- 
education to revive normal aca- central problem cf carrying 
demic conditions in Europe and to| out the Charter mandate to pro- 
produce stholers here to experi-/mote full employment was dis- 
ment in the development of gen- cussed yesterday at the commis- 
eral education. sion’s second meeting at Hunter 
Describing the “eliminati z|College. At the outset, some of the 
wcribing the “e ation Of muropean representatives declared 
the intellectual caste” in Europe that their countries were much 
and the d¢struction of universities,,;more concerned with reconstruc- 
Dr. Davis said it had become the} tion me Conamme gaa Bary 4 —— 
peapensiatimy and opportunity ap ty difficulty was not in find- 
America to feed new life and ing jobs but in finding men for 
thought ihto European education, them. 
which, h¢ asserted, is still con-| Still deep in the initial stages 
cerned wiih professional education of organizatiap, the *ommission 
and needs democratic develop-| received ~ eee ee 
ment. points of some of the members 
Dr. Davis made his remarks at when W. A. Mackintosh of Can-| 
a dinner in the Waldorf-Astoria ada the chairman, declared that! 
Hotel attended by a group of fyi) employment was the major! 
|“friends” -of Smith College and thé! purpose and continuing task of the’ 


tyrntuneosVAY, MAY 1, 1946. 2 ae; 
crew of sninion existed wits rete: [J N. BODY AT ODDS | Former Summer City Hall | ATTLEE REJECTS INQUIRY 


To Be Clab tor Delegates 


The former Arrowood Coun- 
try Club in Queens, built on ris- 
ing overlooking 
fow and used ir, recent 
as a. summer City Hall, will be 
remodeled to serve as a club for 
representatives of the United 
Nations, Borough President 
James A. Burke announced yes- 
terdsy, & reception held 
in hia office at Kew Gardens for 
Trygve Lie and a group of his as- 
sistants. 

From a window of his office 
Mr. Burke pointed out the club 
to his guests and indicated its 
relative closeness to the former 
City Suilding on the World's Fair 
Grounds, which is to be an in- 
terim center of United Nations 
activities. Others who welcomed 
the United Nations 
were Robert Moses and 
Whaien, both of whom in 
the development and lan ping 
of the Fair Grounds, and repre- 
sentatives of Queens business or- 
ganizations. 


petition for labor among em 
ployers. 

The representative of the Unit- 
ed Kingdom, Alexander Loveday, 
added still another objection, de- 
claring that stressing full employ- 
ment “might be looking at things) 
from @ narrow, industrial point of 
view” not important to agricul- 
tural nations. Both Mr. Loveday) 
and his Belgian colleague favored) 
using the term “full employment” | 
as a general practical policy for 


j\group in the League of Nations} -A former Professor of Law at|™éembers of the campaign commit-| gr 


jomtatieng economic stability. 
oup. 


evér possessed was merely a re-|the University of Paria, M. Cassin 
\iteration of a statement that the|was the first French civilian to 
Assistant Secretary General had/join Gen. Charlies de Gaulle in 
made in his speech of welcome to! June, 1940, and was Commissionér 
the delegates on Monday. of Justice and Public Education in 
M. Laugier’s remarks provided|the Free French Nationa! Council 
‘the only positive note to two ses-|that served as the General's provi- 
jsions of the commission devoted! sional Government during the oc- 
jto a review of its terms of refer- cupation. 
lence and a preliminary discussion; Another passenger was Mme. 
of its composition. |Héléne Lefaucheux, a member of 
| Examination of documents sub-'the Status of Women Committee 


mitted to the commission by mem-| 5¢ th ‘ 
bers of the United Nations was! for eae ont Bestel cane 


postponed until #ll members have 
had an opportunity to study them. | 
These documents include: | States; and a statement on essen- 
| The draft declaration on human|tial human right, submitted by 
|rights, submitted by Cuba; com-/ Panama. 

|munications concerning freedom of; The afternoon session was de- 
jinformation and freedom of the| voted to a preliminary discussion 
|press, submitted by the United/of the definitive composition of the 


EWS 
4 
SAKS FIFTH AVE \ » 


ithe 


tee that will appeal for $7,000,000; Miss René Zafiriou of Greece! 

for a dévelopment program at)made it clear then that she had 

Smith ideas of her own on the subject. : 
In women's education, Dr. In a soft voice, barely audible be- Foreign Ministers Will Work as 

Davis said, it is the universities'}yond the conference table, she) Usual on May Day 

task to cirry further the work of) sald the countries of Murope had) ee 

the last seventy years, “where we)to deal first with getting their in-| 

have beer: concerned not to train)dustries back into operation and 

an intellectual caste of women for|that other matters must come in Day is an international labor holt-| 

the professions, but to educate the; turn. She pointed out, too, that/day in Europe, the Foreign Minis-| 


NO HOLIDAY FOR BIG FOUR 


By Wireless to Tas New Youre Trans 
PARIS, April 30—Although May! 


mothers and grandmothers of the|/many South American countries ters’ conference will meet tomor-| 
future.” were anxious that the commission row as usual. 

Karl T. Compton, president of) devote a good deal of its energies) This means no vacation for the 
Massachusetts Institute of|to finding means of ‘aising the conference's personnel. When the 
Techonology, and Mrs. Wallace) production of underdeveloped arear, session was decided on Foreign 
Notestein (Ada Comstock), former! Agreeing that the importance of Minister Vyacheslav Molotov called 
president of Radcliffe College and/placing great emphasis on full em- attention to the fact that tomor- 
former ean of Smith, also|ployment was highly debatable, row was a legal holiday in Russia. 
addressed the meeting. Mrs.|Fernand von Langenhove of Belk Forei*n Secretary Ernest Bevin 
Dwight W. Morrow, honorary|gium said his country now had to commented that the Russian Min-| 
chairman of the fund drive, which) deal with an “undesirable” rise in ister should get double or triple 
will open.in October, presided. wage levels because of sharp com- pay for tomorrow's work. 





* 


They re Lastex® of course—@ satiny mixture of rayon and 


sorry, no mall or phone orders. 


ae 


Cheep hharke 


NEW ADDRESS — 8 W. 57 ST. 


SMART 
ACCESSORIES 


FOR TABLE AND SAR. 
LIBRARY STEPS, LAMPS. 
SMALL TABLES. TRAYS. 

RARE ANTIQUES 


Journalists’ Union Faiis in Effort, 
to Obtain Press investigation | 


By Wireless to Tas New Youn frees. 
LONDON, April 30—Prime Min- 


ister Attlee said today that the 
Government had rejected the pro-| 


} rene of the National Union of 
Royal , 


press. ; 

Tn answer to a question in the 
House of Commons today, Mr. At- 
tlee said he had given careful con- 
sideration to the 

t “see my way to adopt it.” 

An effort by Labor member Tom, 

berg to turn the question into a 
speech attacking “freedom to print 
such capitalist doctrines as the 
proprietor’ 


NO WAITING FOR CUSTOM MADE 


VENETIAN BLINDS 
STEEL 


on wooD 
Any Color Tape You Desire 
or Free Estimate Call 


RE. 4-0305-6 
OR EVES. CALL VA. 6-2580 


tion | SUNDAY 
v LAR BLINDS IRC. 
nister| Hing + York 17, . 3. 


® further question on the) 00 AND SALES BOOMS 


OPEN THURSDAY NIGHTS UNTIL 9 
A Suggestion for 
MAY and JUNE BRIDES 


A suit for travelling is an indispensable part 
of any bride’s trousseau. And because we 
have so perfect a collection in sizes 11 to 18, 
may we suggest that a visit to Edward Reed 
may save you precious time and trouble, 
Our suits are all classic fashions, tailored by 
men’s tailors, of men’s wear fabrics—precisely 
what travelling calls for. And at the one 
price of $41, ready-to-wear, they offer values 
you will find difficult to equal. Why not stop 
in now, so your suit will be ready on time: 


EDWARD a REED, LTD. 


Suits and Coats for Men and Women 


49 West 19th in Recketeller Center 


ere a ed 
SAKS FIFTH AVENUE AT ROCKEFELLER CENTER 


Third. Floor. *Res 
“ Below, 11.95. Beachwear, 





TH 
AFTER CONFERRING ON FOOD SITUATION 


PHILIPPINES SWEPT 
BY DISORDER WAVE 


Soldiers Battle With Members 
of Communist Group After 
Terrorism: and Reprisal 


By H. FORD WILKINS 
By Wireiess to Tas New Youu Treas. 

MANILA, April 30—An out- 
break of armed resistance and vig- 
flante terrorism in Central Luzon 
provinces has accounted for thirty 
violent deaths since the election in 
gunfights between Filipino soldiers 
and well-armed members of the 
so-calied ‘“Hukbalahap Society.” 
This is a widespread semi-political 
organization with Communist 
leanings. 

The disorders have been confined 
to the traditionally malcontent 
rice-growing Provinces of Nueva) 
Ecija, Pampanga and Tarlac. The 
Commonweal]th’s Department of 
Interior has sent reinforcements 
from the Philippine Army’s Mili- 
tary Police Command, which sup- 
plants the pre -war Constabulary 
organization. More reinforcements 
will probably be sent to Nueva 
Ecija where the outbreaks seem 
to be the worst. 

The Governor of Nueva Ecija 
has resigned and the mayor of the 
provincial capital, Cabanatuan, 
has reported that a thousand per- 
sons daily are taking refuge there 
and seeking protection. Lawless 
elements, especially in Nueva} 
Ecija, possessing plenty of rifles, 
ammunition and even machine —s ; o 
guns furnished by the American Former President Herbert Hoover leaving the Viceroy’ + Lodge in 
armed forces during the war to) New Delhi, India. with Mohandas K. Gandhi. Associated Press Radiophoto 
fight the Japanese, have been at ee 
swords’ points among themselves 
for many months. 

The Hukbalahaps supported Pres- 
ident Sergio Osmefia in the elec- 
tions and gave him the only wide 


majority vote in the whole country ; 
from their section. They were not WASHINGTON, April 30 (> 


so much for Mr. Osmefia as they| ~™Measures for putting the Phil- 
were against Manuel A. Roxas, ac-} ippines on their feet economically 
cording to political observers, who/ during the early years of their 
believe that the Huks think that) independence became law today 


the election of Mr. Roxas will with the signature of President 
mean an end to their regional tan 
ruman, 


reign. . , 
Nueva Ecija’s Governor has re- The legislation, he said, gave 
ported that since the election these! notice to the Filipinos and to the 
guerrilla vigilantes have been kid-| world “that we are redeeming 
napping, beating, torturing one our promises to the heroic Phil- 
terrorizing members of peasant , le.” Hed {bed th 
groups belonging to the Hukbala-| ‘PP!ne Ppeopie © GescrEses tas 
measures as “unprecedented” 


hap Seciety. The Huks have in- 
dulged in reprisals, burning, loot-| and as the “heart of the pro- 


ing and terrorizing in their turn; gram for Philippine rehabilita- 

and causing Army intervention on! ¢ion ang recovery.” 

behalf of peace and order. | 
Several pitched battles were re-| 


ported on Monday, involving fifty] 9g MORE GENERALS 


to two hundred armed contestants. A 
At Lapaz, in Tarlac Province, and 
at Santa Ana, = Pampanga Prov- ARE REDUCED IN RANK of 


ince, fifteen Huks and two soldiers 
were killed. The military police WASHINGTON, April 30 UP)— is 


so far have succeeded in routing|Thirty-eight generals, including sas 
armed resistance and have cap-|several wartime division command-|§ 
tured considerable quantities Of| ers were dropped one grade today, 
arms and ammunition and several) 

outlaw leaders. in keeping with the Army's 


Philippine Aid Bills LN® smplorment worn, tity: 


Are Signed by Traman Call at your nearest Navy Recruit- 
ing Station at once. 


. —_ shrinking size. 
SUSPECT, NEAR DEATH, |," "nt a Mos Pe 
DENIES DAVIS KILLING) wartime peak of 1,541 general of- 


| ficers, all but 660 have been re- 


Advised that David E. Donohoe,| duced in rank, retired or are on 
17 years old, accused of taking/ the way to the inactive list. 
part in a holdup last year that re-| In the latest list of reductions 
= mn ~~ wey Bengt of All were sixteen major generals who) 
(Bummy) Davis e fighter, was) 
on the “critical list in the prison each will become a brigadier gen-| 
ward of Kings County Hospital| eral, and among them were Charles 
and might not live through the| 4. Gerhardt, commander in Eu- 
night, Kings County Court offi- | rope of the Twenty-ninth Infantry 
cials visited him last night for the| Division, which originally was com- 
second time in the day to obtain a| posed of Matyland, Virginia and 
deposition. District of Columbia National 
Earlier Judge Louis Goldstein| Guardsmen. General Gerhardt is eee 
had received Donohoe's plea of not | now 4 member of the — Mili- 
guilty on a charge of first degree|*#™y Commission in Brazi see 
murder. The prisoner is said to! Other major generals reduced to|eee 
general include: 


have taken part in the holdup} brigadier 
with his brother Russell, 20; John| Roderick R. Allen, former com-|eee 
Romano, 23, and Vincent Giarraf-|mander of the First Armored/$$® 
fa, 20 | Division. leee 
George Wanderman, attorney! Allison J. Barnett, wartime com-|$$$ 
for both Donohoes, questioned*the|mander of the Ninety-fourth In-\ee6e 
youth last night. The prisoner,|fantry Division and now at Fort/eee 
paralyzed from the shoulders|Bragg, N. C. 
down from a bullet wound in his Holmes E. Dager, former com 
spine, spoke with difficulty. He|mander of the Fifth Armored Di-| 
said that neither he nor his brother | vision 





had pistols with them on the night; Robert W. Grow, commandant of|¢ee 


E NEW. YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


2 RUSSTANS ‘BUZZ’ 
GEN. CLARK'S B-47 


General, Not Aboard, Protests 
Third Such Incident, Laid 
to Lack of Discipline 


By Wireless to Tax New Yorx Tiers, 
VIENNA, April 30—Gen. Mark 
|W. Clark, commander of the Amer- 
ican forces in Austria, has pro- 
tested to the Russians the dan- 
gerous “buzzing” of his own Flying 
Fortress today near St. Poelten, 
| west of Vienna. 

{Clark was not aboard the 
| plane, if was learned from other 
sources. ] 

The plane was piloted by Brig. 
Gén. Ralph A. Snavely and Col. 
H. W. Moore was co-pilot. Gen- 
eral Snavely, chief of the air di- 
vision of the American Command 
in Vienna, was proceeding west- 
ward on a _ scneduled mission 
through an established corridor, 
according to American information. 
When he pased over St. Poelten at 
about 11 o'clock two lend - lease 
Russian Airacobra fighters came 
up and “tuzzed” closely around the 
lane, looping and diving for five 
minutes. The Russian authorities 
said, in response to the American 
protest, that the matter would be 
fully investigated. If the story 
presented by the Americans proves 
correct, measures will be taken to 
| puntem the offenders. 


U. 8S. Envoy on Plane at Time 
| PARIS, Apnml 30 (“%—John G 
|Ehrhardt, the American Minister 
jto Austria, was a passenger in 
General Clark's plane when Ruas- 


— | sian fighters “buzzed” it today, he 


jsaid here tonight on his arrival. 
Briefly describing the incident, Mr. 
Ehrhardt, said that the Russian! 
pilots , haa skimmed “a couple of| 
times” past the plane. 





Ht Just arrived! 


Fine volumes and sets in 


. e 
of the holdup when they were =e Replacement Training Centér,|$$$ n IS 
celebrating, that neither had taken| Fort Knox, Ky., who headed bothieee 


any part in any shooting or rob-|the Third Armored Division and|¢e¢ 
bery, and that he had not heard! the Twenty-sixth Infantry Division|$$$ 
any shots, including the one that/in Europe. jeee 
sent the bullet into his spine. Lewis A. Pick, Missouri River sae 


Trial has been set for May 20/|Division engineer, Omaha, Neb. e¢e¢6 





e wo 
ve ; 
before County Judge Samuel 8. _who saw wartime service in the! eee | 
Leibowitz. India-Burma zone. 


Donohoe was flown here Mon-| Generals reduced from eetgaaerl?® 
day from Kansas City, where he|to temporary colonels included) 
fled and underwent hospital treat-| William L. Lee, who commanded), 
ment for his bullet wound, suf-|the Fifteenth Air Force in the 
fered at the scene of the holdup. | Mediterranean. 





1.49 . 15.94 


PR Ay iran ee 
$* 


Itsaboat! Itsaraft! It's a play-float! 


Sale! Kubber play boats 


First time at this low price! 


Never has New York seen this inflated boat at such a deflated price! 


19.96 


Our Navy fliers kept it 


by their sides on combat missions, parachuted into the sea with it when forced to bail out, 


You'll use it as a surf float to ride the waves at Jones Beach, as a swimming raft for weekends 


at the lake, as a one-man boat for Junior at camp. 
easy to take inflated on the top of a car 


plete with automatic gas inflation cylinder, hand paddles, repair kit. Easy 


ordinary pump. 


Mail, phone orders filled. 


Light enough to carry under one arm, or 


A j ; 
it’s a natural for fishing, hunting trips, too! Com- 


to inflate with 


5th Floor. 


Alse at Macy’s-Parkchester 


nglish 
bicycles 
4.2) 


Whether you puff and pedal in Central 


For the thousands 
of hard-of hearing 


Hearing Aid 


Poor hearing handicaps you and inconveniences 
others. Improve it quickly, easily, inexpensively 
with a Zenith Hearing Aid. 


Super-Powered Model A-3-A $50 


With inconspicuous Neutral Color Earphone and 
Cord and new lightweight batteries. 


Model B-3-A Bone Conduc Siandard Model A-2-A for 
tion Zenith for those whose —_ | 
physicians recommend ik. oe 


$50 $40 


Accapied by American Medic«! Acsociation, Council on Physical Medicine 


FERY 
E 5th Avenue and 34th Street 


“*MACY’S PRICE POLICY: 


Magnificent 18th and 19th century 
editions of famous works of literature. 
Only one of each title, one of each set. 
Some were published as far back as 
1724. All are bound in full or three- 
quarter leather; many are gold-tooled; 
every one is in good condition. A real 
find for collectors of old and unusual 
books; handsome additions to your 
library. No mail or phone orders. 
Bookstore, Macy’s Street Floor. 


Neble—Memoirs of Protectorate-House of Crom- 
well. Birmingham 1724. Full contemporary calf. 2 
a 


The Odyssey of Homer—Trans. by Alexander 
Pope. London 1763. Full contemporary calf. 3 
ES Ee a ee 


George Lerd Lyttelten—History of the Life 
of King Henry 2nd. Dublin 1768, Fall contempo- 
rary calf. 4 volumes... ._._.£.. 9.94 


en Thursday 


% 


Park or ride a bike in Bar Harbor this 
Summer, inake one of these strong, 
swift, streamlined Eng - bikes yours 
today! It has a sturdy 22-inch frame; 
26 x 1%%-inch tires with innertubes; 
and front and rear hand brakes, 
Men’s and women’s models. Women’s 
models with hockey stick gear case. 
Sorry, no mail or phone orders. Macy's 


Sport Center, Fifth floor. 


B-speed model with Sturmey-Archer 
ST ” 61.95 


eeeeeeeeeeceeesn 
eeseeceseceaeces 
eesvseeeeeeeoeeee 


tem. aren te 


‘s Sport Centre, U.S.A. 


derald Square LA. 4-6000 


SSSSHSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSESSSSSESSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSOSSSESSSEHESSHESHESSHSSSSSHOSEHHSSSHESEHES 
SSCSSSSSSSSSSSSSSESSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSESSESSESSSSSHESHESSHSSSSHSSESFEHSSSHHSESOHEEEHEE 
SSCSSSSSSSSSESSSSSSSESSSSESSSSSHESSSSSSSSSSSSSSSESSSCSSSHSSSSSSSSSSSSESHOSSHSSSSSHTESSEESENHE 


Macy’s-Parkechester open late Thursdays and Saturdays 


‘e endeavor to have the prices of our merchandise reflect a six per cent saving for cosh, except on price-fixed merchandise. 


Other Macy News ou Page 3 





GUAM REBUILDING | Marine Reports 
ENDS RELIEF CASES) ssp na ener xrse 


ules still are subject to 
frequently are incomplete. Dates are) 
considered tentative. 


NEW YORE 
Arrived Yesterday 


teal Departing Today 
ge and George N. Seger (Split and Trieste)— 
12 poqengese; time not given; &, 
Bush Terminal. (American port.) 
Dera - Re peshiones ant 
arseilie)—14 passengers; 20, 8. I. 
(American Export.) - ’ 


Navy Restores 2 Chief Towns, 
With Much New Business and 
Washington, Benjamin F. 


. 
Medical and School Centers Soden. William Whipple, Falkan- so as Ore ts | (U 4 ose 
er, John W. owes FA Ape : ae Moore-McCormack.) eat 
m, Peotteniie owa passe . 
Special to Tae New Youre Treces. and yetteville Victory, treope. ' —— Ah =75 Desin Brookiyn. 
WASHINGTON, April 30 — The Due Today (Chilean Line.) / 
Navy Military Government of|John G. Tod (Genoa)-s passengers: Uruguay (Copenhagen and Gdynia)— 
due 11 A. M.; .| Passengers; time not mn; 1, Bush 
ee a through _ oy (American © 76, North River, Terminal. Dauner. ye.) . 
partment today a re te) re Corp. ponsjows)—t passen- 
rehabilitation nent: art has East Point Victory Glotesiy = 89 pee: ers; 8:30 Pr -; 18, Brooklyn. 
sen ; time not given; 45, N. R.| (American South African e.) 
cleared the relief rolls ad ge oe (Isthmian-American West African|Cape San Lucas (Colombia)—12 
charges and ia rebuilding the is-| Line.) sengers; time not given; 56, R. 
land's two chief towns. The re-|Topedaltjord ee “2. (Grace. } : ; 
port covers the tenure of Maj. Gen.| $Xorwagian America Line) 
enry L. Larsen of the Marine|cape San Bias (Venesuela)—12 
Corps from July, 1944, to Febru- csngere} time not given; 65, N. R. 


this year. race.) 
a A former island capital, E. B. Alexander (fouthampton)—055 


Agana, is being rebuilt to } ee a One A. M.; 
12,000 persons. In Agat accom-j|Santa Paula (Havro)—332 war brides 
modations will be provided for R 


and children; 8A. M.; @ N.R. iv. &. A. H. 8. Wisteria (Bremer- 
natives whose villages were total-|7enere! © ¢ fee (Gahu)—487 
ly destroyed during the war. 


Navy, 100 Army, § Coast Guard and| jase nt Potente: OA. 
With a population of 23,000, the 


4 Marine Corps personnel; 9 A, M.; i 2 ~ 

10, 8. I.; Arr y porsonnel to Camp ae Fy See Genentenee on 
island had 17,685 on the reliei rolls 
on Sept. 30, 1944. 


Kilmer, 2 rilaas. time and pi 
General William Weigel (Cristobal)— ; ° pier not 
Natives “have established 219 
business concerns; the Bank of 


104 Navy, 7 Army and 9 Marine| *¥®- 

ape personnel and 140 civilians; Departing Temerrow 
accounts and has received 5,694) ©.™M-i in stream off Rosebank ; - _ 
new accounts totaling $2,903,834, 
and the Navy has imported live- 


nee. Kil- Waterland (Ant ) — Passengers. 
stock, chickens, seed, fertilizer and 


(Holland-America Line.) 
Great Falls Vict (Rio de Janeiro 
ires) 
other items for farming and 
fishery needa. 


and Buenos - . 
(International Freighting Corp. 
A medical center, including a 
300-bed Guam Memorial Hospital . 
Fort Amherst (Halifax 


African Star 


Weetentaster Victory (Live 1) — 

1,400 POW's and guards; time and 
pier not given. 

Sea Filer (Havre)—1,800 POW's and 
guards; time and pier not given. 


Due Tomorrow 
(Routham ton) --510 re 
triates. (U. &, 
Sormack.) 


nes-Moore-Moc- 

James W. Cannon (Antwerp)—12 pee 

sengers. (International Freighting 
Corp.-U. 8. Lines.) 

and &t. 


Argentina 


Castor’ (Curacao and Venesuela)— 

Passengers. (Royal Netherlands.) 

Wilhelmina (Rio de Janeiro)—Passen- 
gers. (Norton, Lilly.) 

for natives and medical schools, Seha‘s)—Passenaete, thurnens.) 

is planned and a 300-bed Quonset H = 

hospital is being used. Pre-natal wees (Havre assengors. (French 

treatment has reversed Guam's/ Rensselaer (Havre) — 666 


Mayari . (Honduras) — Passengers. 
(United Fruit.) 

unfavorable death rate and births), ‘Toops. 

mow exceed deaths. Westerly Victory (Havre)—S44 troops. 


Texarkana Victo (Liverpool and 
Victory 
1 i 
The school enrollment is 7,537 Alhambra Victory (Sremerhaven)—2i 


Havre)-1,400 POW's and guards. 
Navy 


Williams Victo (Liverpool and 

Havre)-—-1,400 POW's and guards. 
'pe nel SAN FRANCISCO 

native students, 2,300 more than a F e (Venenucia)—18 passengers. 

the hichest pre-war enrollment. raee. 

" Cape Trafalgar (Venesuela)—12 pas- 

Ci ches and a library are in|~SPs orate ge ” 


Due Yesterday 
ten. orary buildings durin a 


New Hope, Santa Rita. 
con-|Barnard Victo (Glasgow)—® pas- Mello Franco (Noumea), with 35 pas- 
struction on permanent nes.) 


sengers, mostly Army personnel, 
SAN DIEGO 
Due Yesterday 


Due Today 

cles,| fengers. (U. 8. Li 
—_—_—_—_—_—_—_ Departed Y 

For new scenes—join the United) Horseshoe Splice, 
States gle 17-26, mt rong ie ion haher passeng 
serve with the fighting corps of Tusculu Vict Gust :. Vie- 
Leathernecks. Apply shs Mad tor and Kokomo’ Victory, POW's 
and guards. 


orterday 
hiopia Victory, 
alland, Monte-'U. 8. 8. Glynn (Pacific forward area) 
~1,46T Navy and Marine pereonn 
and 2 civillans; Sea Runner (Pa- 
cific forward area), 1,706 Navy and 
Marine personnel. 


Bonwit Teller 


Beauty Salon, Seventh Floor 


straight out of Harper’s Bazaar: 

“neck and shoulders become focal point of silhouette . . (note) 
extraordinary expressivencss of shoulders .. remarkable way in which neck gives 
whole woman air of pride and poise .. But you have to care, to work at it.. 


have your neck and shoulders creamed and molded by expert hands”.. 


which is bound with flaming oiled 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


REDS IN CHANGCHUN 


before the pole is hurled STORE HOURS THURSDAY 11 


rage 
against a building. 

Some soldiers, despite Commu- 
nist proscriptions against looting, 
have committed excesses. Shao 

n-tse, Chungking Cr tral Daily 
ews CO; nt, Wao Was cap- 
tured at Nationalist headquarters, 
returned home after eighteen 
hours’ imprisonment minus his 
shirt, camera, wrist watch, foun- 
tain pen and 5,000 Manchurian 

dollars. 
Mr. Shao saia Cor ists took 

By HENRY RB. LIEBERMAN shoes from Nationalist soldiers. 

By Wireless to Tas New Youx Trscns. One Communist demanded Mr. 

CHANGCHUN, Manchuria, April|Shao’s shoes, but he was allowed 

20 (Delayed) —The first glimpse of|to keep them after he explained 


Manchuria’s Democratic Unity ~~ Aye were necessary in his 


Army, which is now contesting the) 4 te, Mr. Shao’s report I saw « 
authority of Generalissimo Chiang|number of Communists carry! 
Kai-shek’s Government here, re-|jong strings of shoes tied aro 
veals that the Communist core oftheir necks. 
this army is not rabble but a dis-| By contrast with these seizures, 
ciplined, trained, organized, well-/nowever, were the actions of about 
cered figh machine, seventy-five Communist soldiers 
The Commu fighters, from) who invaded the home of Mayor 
officers down to privates, areic. M. Chao at midnight April 17, 
well indoctrinated, too, under &@ rousing five American correspond- 
system of political commissars. A| ents there. They were led by Capt. 
number girls are with the\chang Chen-chung, who explained 
Army, doing propaganda workitne intrusion was necessary be- 
among civilians. cause of the military advance. He 
Such was the Communist organ-|nromised his men would get out 
ization that shortly after enter-\within twenty-four hours, which 
ing the city from four directions|they did, 
the sector commanders were able n the hungry Communists 
to communicate by telephone./entered the house they demanded 
Communist supply carriers worked |ricg and hot water. Later, as their 
efficiently, the troops deing fol-|rice carriers arrived, they returned 
lowed pete the streets by &/aii the food they had taken. ' 
co of atre her beerers and con- Communist rivates get three : 
scripted civilians, lugging buckets/Manchurian dollars a month, leas 
of rice from shoulder poles. Horses|than two United States cents. They 
carried liaison riders during the|jive mainly on a diet of rice and 
battle. leabbage. One soldier said he used 
The sharp-looking, tough Eighth |his infinitesimal pay to buy cigar- 
Route Army men, who salute their! sttes. 
— are — yo discipline. a 
ey wear ye inese Army . 
summer uniforma and captured Russians’ Ald Suspected 
fleece-lined Japanese caps. Moat CHANGCHUN, Manchuria, April 
of them carry Japanose rifles but/20 (Delayed) (UP) — At least aix 
they also have American Reming-/Russian soldiers suspected of help- 
tons, taken from Central Govern-|ing Chinese Communists direct ar- 
ment troops earlier in the civiljtillery fire against Central Gov- 
war. ernment troop positions inside 
The Communists went into bat-|C chun were captured by Na- 
tle with several tanks, artillery,|t lata before the city fell to 
machine guns and grenades. An-|assaul Communist troops. 
other weapon of home manufac-| The Nationalist field commander, 
ture is an “arson pole,” which has|Gen. Liu Teh-pu told —— 
seen little use here so far. A long'dents he ha@ seen bodies of Rus- 
stick has a platform attachmenti|sians among the corpses of Chinese 
Communists. 


ARE STRONG FORCE 


Communist Core of Army Is 
Well-Officered and Under 
Strict Discipline 


Solovdl . «+ goatskin slipper with the ballet-look ... 


leather soles... Red, white, black, green 


+.» Sizes 4-9, narrow, medium . .. Playshoes, 


stermsesre + ee 


Mail and phone orders filled 


First and Third Floors 


Also grey or chamois suede 


STERN BROTHERS, <1 W. 42ND &T., MN. Y. 18 LO &-6000.—.._...... 


For a peach satin throat.. 
trust the skillful hands of our Marie Earle expert 


Think of your neck as a pedestal on which your face rests. Think of how weak 

and tired it must sometimes get. . tired strained muscles, tired dull skin. Surely 
something to correct, isn’t it, for the new lower bare neck fashions? But Marie Earle 

has worked out a ninety-minute “Peach Satin” treatment .. one third the time spent molding 
and toning the neck, working over shoulders, breaking down any tendency towards 
dowager's lump. From the first stimulating creams and warm oils of the restoration 

process, to the wonderful complete makeup for face and throat, it’s pure magic. 


10.00 the complete “Peach Satin” treatment. Beauty Salon, Seventh Floor, 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY I, 1946. 


|pairs to the Presidential residence. UNRRA AIDE EXTOLS data concerning the arrival and BLOOMINGDALE’S OPEN THURSDAYS UNTIL ca) 
WU. He had been offered the magnifi- |distribution of supplies were pro- 

‘cent palace built by Wang Ching-| WHITE RUSSIAN HELP aucea without delay. We were 
SEES RARLY TRUCE «= puppet president, but he re- _ —————— very much encouraged inasmuch| 
\jected it as too lavish. By Wireless to Tus New Yorn Tne. as we have complete freedom of! 
———— | General Marshall's quarters are) MOSCOW, April 30-—-A: favor-|movement, limited only at present. 
jin the residence of the former Ger-jabie and enlightening report on|py the lack of transportation and| 
Source Close to Marshall Says! man Ambassador to the puppet Russia's attitude and cooperation interpreters,” Mr. Waller wrote. | 


Manchurian Pact May Be government. in the matter of the United Na-| The mission was especially 
Made in a Few Days Cee ee enle net! whanitions Relief and Rehabilitation| grateful for the immediate concern 
they ste off their plane from|missions has just come to hand|*hown by local officials when Mr. 
a y pped P Scandrett contracted pneumonia 
- Chungking was Gen. Ho Ying-chin,/from Minsk where a team of soon after his arrival. P 
NANKING, April 30 >. —A truce pope pee awe Chiang Kaj-shek’s|Americans under the management| As scon as Kuzmav Kiselev, Sec- 
in China's fratricidal struggle over rsa of ‘staf Mager theme ee: of Richard B. Scandrett of New|retary of State, was notified “we 
Manchuria was foreseen “within a ci¢ to Ghineen onste gan "|York is inspecting the distribution|had the impression of every medi-| 
few days” by a source close toGen.| In an interview General Ho said 4 en supplies to White = resource = the Nes ge “ee be-| 
George C. Marshall with arrival to-|he was one ¢f China's leading lib-| vm tte tion wae de-lMe Wale mete usposal”| 
: erals and supporters of democracy. Tee Ser 7 / 
day of the special United States) vie added that in 1940 he had or.|Y0ted to the reception and housing) Two physicians were assigned. | 
envoy for a resumption of negotia- fered @ formula for & watt b~ of the mission. The delegation|The drugs administered included) 
tions that got nowhere in Chung-|tiement of ete yma A was quartered in a spacivus old| penicillin, which was the product 
king. differences, which was accepted b residence in the war blasted city. lof the Bristol Laboratories at 
The shift from the wartime cap-| General Chou but was at ytd “Tke facilities were more than|Syracuse, N. Y. Mr. Scandrett is) 
ital to Nanking, capital of a re- by Communist headquarters at Ye-| Adequate and much better than|now fully recovered. At present) 
building China, seemed to have! nan ‘ the Reparations Commission had,” |the White Russian mission feels 
cleared away the gloom that hung 4 ‘ | Theodore oe ye ay that me a 2 —s 
over Ch kin, terday. Instead 5 officer, report y fast courier. |not only the letter bu e sp o 
of talk of indefinite delays in ar-| TRADE ACCORD EXTENDED “very exact and comprehensive 'the UNRRA contract. 
riving at a truce formula, there arel 4. “ P - ————— aa 
predictions that the Government|France and: Britain Sign Pact 
and the Communists will soon get! Lasting Through 1946 BLOOMINGDALE’S OPEN THURSDAYS UNTIL QO 
together. 7 8 
| The Marshall headquarters By Wireless to Pus New Yous Times | 
source said that negotiations on| PARIS, April 30-- France and 
Manchuria were proceeding in an|Britain signed an accord today) 
optimistic atmosphere and that he/prolonging until the year-end the 
ted “to see results within ajclearing agreement that, recently’ 
. _ |falling due, feft France Britain's) 
Negotiations will be resumed asjheavy debtor; 
soon as Gen. Chou En-lai,the Com-| France had used all her pur- 
munist representative, and Gen.|chase credits in imports from! 
Hsu Yung-chang, who speaks for|Britain whilp the British had 
the Government, arrive: They are|taken only aivery small quantity) 
expected Thursday or soorer. of goods from France. At the end) 
¢ headquarters source added of February France paid Britain) 
that at least six plans for a cease-| {40,000,000 in, gold, thus reducing | 
fire agreement had been made, any her indebtedriess to £110,000,000..| 
- J Co ° 
of which might work, and the Under the new accord France ac 
rivals were “getting closer and quires credits for further pur-| 
closer” together. chases in thé British zone until 
Generalissimo Chiang ia sched-|Jan. 1. 
uled to mark the return of Nan- cy Nata Wt ted BAS 
king to the status of capital at} You may new enlist in the Regu- 
& ceremony Sunday at the tomb of|lar Navy for! two, three, four or 
Sun Yat-sen, founder of the re-|six years. Fo* additional informa- 
public. tion, go to your nearest United 
The Generalissimo will live at)States Navy Recruiting Station at 
the Military Academy pending re-| once. ; 


—————— SS ——— 


Recognize that? That’s Everfast’s |/BLOOMINGDALE’S OPEN THURSDAYS UNTIL Q 


lightning-stroke pique... 


Something we've been making much of this 

spring ...and my, how it does for a pinafore 

in the sun! Nice crusty white pique with a 

dazzle of stripes across it, pulled close to the 

waist and with plenty of breeze to the skirt. 

Bive, lime; hyacinth or beige stripes, 10 to 18, 12.95. 


* GARDEN CITY 
PAST ORANGE 


MADISON AT 67th 
STAMFORD + 


PIFTH AVENUE AT 41st © 48th © SSth + 
WHITE PLAINS © BRONKVILLE + GREENWICH « 


BLOOMINGDALE’S OPEN THURSDAYS UNTIL 9 


OUR FAMOUS NIP 'N’ TUCK* 
NOW LONG-SLEEVED AND 


Oo “Mtrsts 
Long sleeves—in answer to 
nurses’ calls. And in this 
uniform with triangle inserts 
for wgist-nipping and tucks 
for tidiness, there’s the answer 
to plenty of ease while yau 
work. White poplin, sizes 
12 to 44. Ours exclusively, 3.98 


Bloomingdale’s Uniforms, 
2nd Floor 


*Reg. U i. Pat. Olt. 


BLOOMINGDALE’S 


LEXINGTON at 59th STREET, 


CROWN-TESTED* RAYON IN 
PAJAMAS THAT LOOK 


Ytich Cb ler Sabbing 


The Da-N-Ite fabric by Asco*, 
a luxurious rayon jacquard, 
bears the Green Light tag— 
a signal to go ahead and - 
wash without worrying abcut 
excessive shrinkage, seam 
slippage, tensile strength or 
permanent finish. Styled by 
Flobert in tearosé or white. 
Sizes 12 to 20. 8.98 


Bloomingdale’s Underwear, 
2nd Floor 


“Req. U &. Pat. On. 


FOR MOTHER'S DAY, CHOOSE 
PRETTY SLIPPERS THAT WILL 


Y ease e lay Mblher 


A. It she’s gay and glamorous: 
high-heeled rayon satin mules 
in red or royal with leather 
soles. Sizes4to9. 5.95 


B. If she’s petite and dainty: 
high-wedge mule of light blue 
rayon satin with tinsel thread 
design. Sizes 4 to 7%. 10.50 


C. If she’s. comfort-loving: 
soft ballet slipper in black, 
pink or blue rayon satin with 
embroidery. 4to9. 2.49 


D. If she’s the practical type: 
playshoe-slipper by Oomphie 
in black-arid-white check 
cotton with leather-sole 
wedge. Sizes 4to9. 4.00 


On orders outside our delivery area, 
add 10¢ for shipping costs. 


Bloomingdale's Casual Shoes, 
$rd Floor | 


NEW YORK 22, N. Y. 


TALLER-CROWN ROAMABOUTS* 
BY DRAPER, THESE CRISP AND 


oO f-Ga 
ovely Of unuts 


They feel so cool and light on 
your head, look so airy and 
crisp with your summer 
costumes. All very high 
crowned and small brimmed, 
they’re of wonderful Panama 
straw that was imported 

from Ecuador, and fashioned 
here by Draper into these four 
delightful styles, each with 
wide contrasting rayon ribbon 
and misty veiling. Each 10.50 


Bloomingdale's Better 
Millinery, 3rd Floor 


*Trademark 


VOLUNTEER 5-5900 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY lI, 1946. 


JAPAN FOOD POLIGY Faris Takes Spo tlight JAPANESE F EARFU L | STORE HOURS THURS. 11 A. M. TO 8 P. M. 
| M © I HELDU.S.CONCERN) = sre ic prose Howeser rings | ON M’ARTHUR PLOT | 
& ] (> r Investigation Plan Postponed : Great Power Issues Little Changed Continued From Page 1 


by Council When Atcheson a er last days of the war he became a 


. ons SON W. IN suicide pilot in the Kamikaze fly- 
States Firm Position By HANSO BALDWI ing corps organized to repel inva- 


rn The ‘deliberations of the Paris;without the consent of the gov-! sion 
Conference of Foreign Ministers|erned. As J li hoto 
TOKYO, April 30 “.®—The Four-' and the: wordy United Nations de-| Here was an official attempt to greuhe aa. aekinenns a na- 
Power Allied Council today post-| bates in: the Bronx must be viewed /erect around the United States the| tion's press to aid in the manhunt, 
poned a decision on Russia's o~| Im proper perspective against the|same kind of “iron curtain” that Brig. Gen. Frayne Baker, Head- 
j posal to investigate Japan's |bleak background of world eventsa.|we are condemning in Europe and| quarters public relations officer, 
MW) situation after the American mem- For the past two months the|that most observers agree makes) warned that Tokayama was armed 
| ber replied, in effect, that it was spotligh? of public attention has/a real rapprochement with Russia! with grenades and pistols. 
strictly the concern of Gen. Douglas Cee" focused upon the dramatic my ay as that “curtain”| ‘The plotter now in custody) 
MacArthur and the United States. stage o} Hunter College Gymna-|is not lifted. tipped off Headquarters after To- 
George Atcheson Jr Council) 2U™ ard this week it shifted to| The unofficial reaction of the /kayama, fearing betrayal, tried to 
chairman, said bluntly “The ques- Paris. Sut the real history that/Justice Department to the Supreme! péison him, General Baker said. 
tion of whether the United States will ultimately decide the fate of/Court rejection of their case was/The Japanese in custody Bn 
might send food to other countries unborn g¢nerations is being made|that publications in this country! give of the total of six men who, 
rather than to Japan -is entirely| the wings, not on the public)might have to be more restricted) ne said, were involved. 
outside the Council's purview.” He ase: in what they publish. Here, indeed,| “fortunately,” General Baker 
. | Nothing that has yet occurred in|!s distinct proof that “a demand) cdntinued, “the poison was not im-| 


: prea = ei a far a forthe Bronx or so far in Paris canjfor power to compel is but @ con-| mediately fatal. He was taken by 

- to send food th #en¢'be compared in importance to the|fession of incompetence to lead.” | jgnanese police to an Ame 

‘ large numbers of additional t P po merican 

MMW — | Chinese: Communist seizure of e.¢ 6 hospital, where, through experi-| 


troops.” |most of Manchuri 
Food is sent, h ted, t fe- of Manchuria or to the con-| Historic Landmarks Disappear (erced assistance, he was revived 
guard sommnatinn yom edn it rage 71 A eegene < oes See Some of the greatest engineering |*"4 Save details of parts of the 
“ : » : . e a- ” 
~ ape with misery ener.) tions has not decided or even eG ager wage Bg — a already ser 
ions”—which are solely General) sidered ynany of the basic problems) *re a ne o the Hm of the med for Demonstration 
MacArthur's affair. of our times, and so far the delib-|P®#t. Battered and storm-damaged) The plot was timed to explode 
Study Not Disapproved erations at Paris have resulted in ey hg omy ge pg be. po br LA of none grenades ans 
. i! > ° ~| pistol fire “some time during Com- 
W. McMahon Ball, British Com-|>¥-passing some of the most ¢on-) oi)” 6 the artificial ports that| miunistic demenetratiens” Tonpee-] 


“ troversiél questions. 
monwealth member, had suggested No fundamental changes in the facilitated the Normandy cam-/row, the Headquarters announce- 


that discussion of the food problem al d the Stilwell Road, built 
: |world political, economic or mili-|P®@’&™. &n e wel) Koad, built) ment said. 
oe advanced to sd top s “tne | tary aiiations have occurred as & by the bodies of mer, is already} Communist General Secretary 
VY ouncil’s agenda ause 0 e returning to the jungle from which| Kiuchi Tokuda declared that the) 
- ; 


| 


»| result of either meeting, and the 
topical importance of the subject. tendency—started even before the it was carved. The road and a Communists were in no way in- 


\Neither he nor Chin's representa-| 614 of the war—toward division of|1:600-mile four-inch pipe line with| valved, had “absolutely no reason 
tive disapproved & ae Vena the world into power blocs and re-|PU™Mping stations, and some eleven|tco do away with General MacAr-| 
posal that a committee study the gional groups, has continued. military airports in or near Burma)thbur,” never heard of Tokayama, 
matter, although Mr. Atcheson re- Biber Russian Vietert were built at a cost of §200,000,000./and never let former thought po- 
marked that “for technical rea- we The road was probably the most) licemen join the party anyway. | 

in history, and it is| There were no extra guards 


/) isons” he could not participate.| The impending domination of|/expensive 
/ There remained a possibility that)much o? Manchuria by the Chi-|doubtful whether it ever carried | around General MacArthur's down-, 
oa / Russian, British and Chinese mem-|nese Cpmmunists — undoubtedly|enough traffic to justify its ex-|town headquarters, which will be 
y) UM | 








ee with their own pet gee 7“ —— ee The Pe mo! terrain, = in plain view of the paraders. 
vs ned .by e Russians—merely|the floods o e Monsoon rains; Col. H. I. T. Creswell, chief of 
oh ee array Bree on my the poem “deal,” = a have — a civil intelligence, disclosed that the) 6 
/ . when that agreement was made|maintenance a g2 cost an €\conspiracy became known five days! 
laughed when Brig. Gen. Kea R. Manchutia became, in a strategic\route the road followed from India|ago when the poisoned plotter was| COOL COMFORT IN RAYON SEERSUCKER 
Dyke, head of General acAr-|and probably in a political sense,|through Burma into Yunnan Prov-|taken to a hospital. 
thur's civil information and educa-/| Russian: jince, China, is uneconomical in . 
tion section, explained that re-| Northern Iran is also and will| peacetime. Plotters Still at Large 6 20 
habilitation of the Japanese educa-|remain in the Russian zone of in- e a: Colonel Creswell said all the s 
tion system “is like performing an/fluence,’ and the Communists of other known plotters were still at 
appendicitis operation while the|the wor'd, acting in closer coordi- Mnemy Tsibute to Housten jlarge, “but are being rounded up.” S . ial — ee 
patient is walking around the op-|nation than any other political The United States cruiser Hous-|He did not elaborate. JO soft, sO fine, you wont believe it at this price 
erating room.” ioc: eamilt tal party, ake scoring a minor victory | ay — bog Mopser fos Sy engpeey la hag ae of wo menor rent . . . Square neck accented with flattering little 
nother Russ uestio or a in many nations. yen| ’ 7a, mn, , |Kay G@ dee ! re- ™ < ot Blane 
garding education, brought a reply|in such sountries ~! Cuba and Bra-|of the greatest battles in sea his- |liminary arrangements for some bow S, and buttons right down to the hem. Sizes 
from General Dyke that an Im-/zil, Communist influence and Com-|tory, — nt — oun time, and had more than $9,000 12-18 in red, green, navy or brown and white 
‘ |perial Ordinance for the screening|munist propaganda are increasing.|troop transports and. damaged a/worth of Japanese money to enlist ; 1 ' . 
lof Japan's 40,000 teachers was ‘ ~~ * « § destroyer and several other vessels |lieutenants. checks. Mail and phone orders. State second 
ocean Ie TET. aainss omelet duets to inven, tse wertimclend, pect-war Jepasecs copertsition fee fiat. ie’ chorea poem COOr Choice. ey rccenalens Wey 
one ran n ’ , . : - on, rst in eleven years, 
pathies will be ousted, he said, re-|Case, the provisions of the Espion-|show. The Houston was opposed/300,000 persons are scheduled to Ad4 12c shipping charges beyond our regular delivery ares 
porting that 650 already have been aetna ge ye man | omy _— in her last fight by Your or = gather in front of the Imperial 
eliminated. jmailing out o e country clip-jenemy cruisers, twenty-one e-|Pélace only a block from Genera! . 
Chinese Lieut. Gen. Chu shin-|Pin a from Ame! can papers and\stroyers and forty to fifty troop|MacArthur’s headquarters for STERN'S FASHION BASEMENT, 420 ST. & AVENUE OF AMERICAS, &. Y. (8, LG 5-6008 
iming asked about Japanese lan-| Pertodicels about scientific subjecta|ships. The Japanese put the scene|specches and a parade. 
\guage reform. General Dyke said\and the national defense is an in-|of the Houston's sinking off Bul-| -—————--—— 
the topic was too important for a famous *xample of how far Gov-|zend Island near the western tip 
quick decision. jernment: may attempt to go, even'of Java. 
| Delegates were told that several) =" a — ee 
lans for disposing of Zaibatsu | 
| Tramily seneneny? BF. were ee = Japanese people, have been guided by principles em-| 
being considered. ing Secretary Acheson said, lies) bodied recently in the Far Eastern 
ES — pl Japanese Government and!Commission's policy statement on) 
e upreme Commander's re-|foqd supply for Japan 
Subject to Review Here sponsibility is limited to requests) 
By Wireless to Tus New Yorx Times. for guch imports as are necessary | Ex-Cashier of Bank Indicted 
WASHINGTON, April 30-—-Gen-|to prevent such widespread disease) Austin C. Goodier, 47 years old, 
eral MacArthur's policies in thejand unrest as endanger the safety|former cashier of the National 
feeding of the Japanese are subject/of the occupying forces. | Bank of Kings Park, Suffolk Coun-| 
to review here, Dean Acheson, Act-| In thi sense, he added, the Bu-| ty, L. L, wae indicted yesterday by 
ing Secretary of State, said today|preme Commander and the United|/a Federal grard jury in Brooklyn 
in commenting at his news confer-|States Government have a special/on a charge of e~bezzling $35,000) 
ence on the food policy statementiand direct concern. The Supreme| of the bank's funds over a period 
imade in Tokyo by George Atcheson|\Commander’s requests, he con-\of thirteen years, Gocdier, who) 
Jr.. the State Department's po-|tinued, are subject to review in the|/lives at 25-34 Ninety seventh 
/litical adviser to the Supreme Com-|light of the tight world supply sit-' Street, Elmhurst, Queens, war con-| 
mander. juation by several agencies of the tinued in §2,000 bail for pleac‘ng) 
The fundamental responsibility|United States Government which'on Monday. 




















The “pancake” on a shoulder strap, 


black or navy rayon faille. 22.75° 
(monogram, extra) 


| Fifth Ave. at th, N.Y. 16 * New Rochelle * Hampstead 


Open Thursdays ‘til Y 


The “candy jar”, with plastic lid, 


black or navy rayon faille. 32.75° 


we check it in white for crisp, now-thru- 


summer coolness * we check its fashion | Deep sleeve Cool-seeker 


news to be sure it’s slim, flattering and 


distinctive * and there you are, assured of 
ion i nd cott u“ ] 5 
The “picture frame” bag in black re eee eee by Duchess Royal in Hope Skillman cotton, 1 Gg 


or navy rayon faille. 15.00" dress with feminine neckline bows * brown, 


green, rose or light blue with white » Wonderfully crisp corded cotton in a candy striped, 


16% to 22% ° 29.95 coul-as-a-breeze suit for hot days ahead. 
Front-tied to make your waist snug and small. 


“add 20% Federal Tax 


women's fashion salon, third floor 
G89 Fifth Avenue at Sith Street Red, grey ,blue, brown stripes on white. Sizes 10-18. 
450 Fifth Avenue at 4th Street , 
A&S Sportewear, Third, East. Mail or phone orders filled while quantities las. 


1552 Broadway at 46th Street Beyond our motor delivery area, add 12¢ shipping charges. 
Call CUmberland 6-6000 





TRUMAN COMMENT 


AROUSES CONCERN 


His Endorsement of Report on 
Palestine Involves Some 
High Policy Issues 


By JAMES RESTON 

Special to Tus New Yorx Trurs 
WASHINGTON, April 30—The 
report of the Anglo-American 
Committee of Inquiry on Pales- 
tine is inacceptable to both Jews 
and Arabs and President Truman's 


comment on this report seems) 
likely to raise fundamental ques-| 


tions for the United States and 
Great Britain on the future of 
Palestine and the defense of the 
entire Near East 
- Those Jews who have favored 
the creation of a Jewish National 
Home in Palestine approve the 
recommendation in the report o 
permitting 100,000 displaced Jews 
to enter Palestine from Europe as 
soon as possible. They also note 
with favor the repudiation of two 
principles contained in the British 
White Paper of 1939: First, the 
dependence of further Jewish im- 
migration upon Arab consent, and 
second, the ban on Jewish land 
purchase in certain parts of Pales- 
tine 

They oppose the report, how- 
ever, because they nete among 
other things that 100,000 is only 
a fraction of the 1,000,000 “Jews 
for which continued existence in 
Europe is intolerable,” and they 
oppose the committee’s recom- 
mendation that “Palestine shall be 
neither a Jewish State nor an 
Arab State.” 


Called a Repudiation 


This latter statement, they say, 
“repudiates the purpose of the 
Balfour Declaration and the Pal- 
estine mandate, whose authors 
stated repeatedly that it was in- 
tended that Palestine should de- 
velop into a Jewish State, once a 
Jewish majority was established 
in that country * * *” 


| 
On the other hand, the Director 


of the Arab Office in Washington, 
K. Khairy, issued a statement to- 
night saying 
dations of the 
deny the Arabs the right of self- 
determination, and “will, no doubt, 
have serious repercussions.” Of 
all the seventeen commissions that 


statement added, none had failed 
so conspicuously and the Arab 
countries, it concluded, would not 
be bound by its recommendations 
Comment Held Vital 


The President's comment on the 


House of Commons Pay 


Raised to £1,000 a Year 


By Wireless (0 Tas New Yorx Timus 

LONDON, April 30—The sal- 
aries of Members of the House 
of Commone will be raised from 
£600 to £1,000 a year, Hugh 
Dalton, Chancellor of the Ex- 


chequer, announced today. The | 


| new scale will be effective as of 
April 1, 1948. 

The salaries of Junior Minis- 
ters will also be raised, in some 
cases by £2,000 yearly, but all 
the increases will be subject to 
normal income tax. The Govern- 
ment turned down recommenda- 
tions of a parliamentary com- 
mittee that £500 of salary should 
be tax-free. 


Mr. Truman's policy will have in 
the current negotiations which are 
going on for American and British 
jeconomic an¢ military concessions 
jin the Near end Middle East. And 
ithe fourth is whether in view of 
these questions, and in view of the 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY I, 1946. 


Gimbels 


ARABS SAY REPORT 
WILL HELP RUSSIA 


Leaders Predict Swing to the 
Left—Fight Implied to Com- 
bat Jews’ Entry 


By Cable to Tus New Yorx Times, 

JERUSALEM, Wednesday, May 
l—Arabs here are fighting-mad 
after reading the recommendations 
of the Anglo-American Commit- 
tee’s report on Palestine. They as- 
sert that the Jewish Agency it- 
self could not have written any- 
thing better for the Jews. 

In substance, they assert that 
the democracies have let them 
down completely and that the en- 
tire Middle Kast will “go left." 

A spokesman for the Arab Of- 
fice, Ahmed Bey Shukry, said: 

“The recommendations if issued 
by the Jewish Agency could not 


fact that the Committee of Inquiry|have been any worse. The main 


was an Ang'io-American Affair— 
Mr. Truman had some kind of an 
jagreement with Prime Minister 


ithe demand of President Truman! 


task of the committee was appar- 
ently to find ways of rationalizing 


| Attlee on these questions or wheth-|for admitting 100,000 Jews into 
er he made the statement on his|Palestine. This is just another 


own. 


| There is the most fundamental|set aside the White Paper. Our| 


way of the British Government to 


difference of opinion on whether|reaction is that the recommenda- 
100,000 more Jews can be sent into| tions are a new indication of a de- 


| Palestine without force. 


[termined policy to. displace the 


The Britis, have made clear to|Arabs in their own country and 
Mr. Truman ever since his first|establish by stages a Jewish state. 


statement that he favored allowing 


“When the time comes when we 


100,000 Jews to enter Palestine, become totally desperate of diplo- 


that, in their opinion, they would| 


matic channels the nation shall 


have to impore this policy by force|shelve diplomacy. The recommenda- 
of arms. They have also pointed) tions appear to us to be high trea- 
out to him that they would be 80n to democracy and a great be- 


delighted to work out a joint policy 


trayal of justice. In short, it is an 


with the United States in Palestine |!njustice which must be resisted by 


responsybilities for that policy. 


provided we. would assume joint|the unanimous eadeavor of the! 
|Arab and Moslem world.” 


What they do not want to do| Moslems “will not hesitate now 
however—and they have also made|‘° Support their brethren by all 
this clear to the President—is to|™e#ns and ways,” the Arab 


carry out an American policy that| 
is not backed by American author- 


spokesman said. “To us it is a 


|battle to the death. It means our 


ity and not carried out either with existence or extermination.” 


the military help of the United! 


States or the specific approval and| 
support of the United Nations, 


policy could be implemented wit 
out bloodshed, however, the other 


Nothing was forthcoming from 


Jewish Agency spokesmen tonight, 


but there will be a statement to-| 


Assuming that the immigration ™°TTow morning after a meeting 
n-|of the executive committee. 


From the Arab Higher Com- 


that the recommen-|question remains about the effect mittee came a blistering statement 
committee would of this policy on the Moslem world by Jamal] Husseini, chairman, who 


in general and the Near East in ©harged that the report had been 
made under pressure of the United 


For all these reasons the Pales-|States and that it “condemned 
Palestine to be a land of bloodshed Chair) Weizmann as saying that 
have inquired into Pélestine, the/dent Truman's comments on it, are and misery. 


particular. 
tine report, and particularly Presi- 


being viewed with the greatest 


He added that the Arabs in 


TRUMANSAIDTOASK 
JEWISH ENTRY SOON 


| 
| = 
| 


Continued From Page 1 


ito be a pawn of the Colonial Of- 
fice.” 

Mr. Crum said: 

“In -its immediiate effect, the re- 
|port constitutes a victory for the 
iprogréssivee and liberal forces 
which have fought so long for jus- 
tice te the Jews. But in its long- 
range implications it is far more 
important. 

“It means that the twelve mem- 
bers Gf the Anglo-American Com- 
missicn are in agreement that 
power politics and collective secu- 
rity cannot exist together in the 
same world; that if you preach 
democracy your actions must 
measure up to your words. In a 
;} world of jealous and rival nation- 
lalisma, the report forthrightly 
jcondemns narrow nationalism for 
| the evil that it is. 


Truman's Action Praised 


“President Truman should be 
particularly congratulated for the 
ivigorcus fight he has made for 
bold and decisive action both in 
relation to the victims of Nazi and 
Fascist persecution and also in 
Palestine. Without his constan’ 
aid, the result would have been 
impossible. 

“It now remains to implement 
jthe report. Our military authori- 
ities informed us that, given the 
green light, the 100,000 displaced 
Jews can be transported to Pales- 
tine within two months, I am con- 
fident' that directives will issue 
iforthwith.” 

Mr. Proskauer said that in ad-| 
vance of a careful study of the! 
lreport, the first reaction of 
tNe American Jewish Committee 
“must be an expression of pro- 
found gratitude to President Tru- 
|man for carrying forward to a 
lgsuccessful issue the project to se- 
lcure the recommendation of the 
100,00 Jews into Palestine.” 

He interpreted the report as) 
amousting to the abrogation of| 
the Fritish White Paper and the) 
removal of unjust restrictions con- 
cerning land acquisition. 


Denounced by Rabbi 


He conceded a probable differ- 
jence )f opinion over the ultimate 
lrecontmendations, but quoted Dr 





an indispensable condition to the 
jsolution of the Palestinian question 


interest in the capital. It is seen|Palestine and neighboring states\was that neither Jew nor Arab 
by some in domestic political) would fight the proposals, particu-|ghould dominate the other 

terms; it is seen by others in terms larly that for admitting 100,000 
of politics of Palestine; And it is Jews. “We will fight with the ut-|the commission was “not even a 
being seen by a third group as a/|most energy,” he said, 


much broader question that is 


He continued: “The first result 


Rabbi Korff said the action of 


turtle march to Jewish statehood|/ 
land independence” and asserted| 


report was considered in the em-/likely to influence political affairs|will be a general trend all over the|that :“to aggravate matters the 
bassies to be of more importance in a wide and inflammable area|Middle East to the left. We will! 
than the report itself, since the where the interests of the United|grab at any straw-—-Russia or any-| this report ‘evidence’ which has 
committee of inquiry merely had States, Britain and the Soviet Un-|one who will help us. The report | long been proved as irrelevant and! 
was inhuman and harsh.” 


the power of recommendation 
while the President's comment is 


ion are in precarious balance. 


Auni Bey Abdul Hadi, head of 


regarded as a statemeht of United) Divorces George W. Vanderbilt the Independent Arab party and 


States policy. 
This fact has raised a num- 
ber of questions in the capital: 


mendation of the committee can! 
be imposed on the Arabs without 
force. The second is whether, in 
view of Mr. Truman's letter, the 
United States is prepared to as- 
sume part of the responsibility for 
carrying out the immigration poli- 
cy, which Mr. Truman espouses. 
The third question is what effect 


MIAMI, Fia., April 


tlement were not disclosed but at- 
torneys said Mrs, Vanderbilt would 
get custody of her daughter, Lu-! 
cile Margaret, 8, .and receive 
maintenance and support for the 
child. The Vanderbilts were mar-| 
ried in 1935. She is the ~~ 
of J. Lester Parsons of eat 
Orange, N. J. 


~~ GIMBELS OPEN THURSDAYS till 9 





30 UP—Mrs. former side to the late King Fei- 


sal, declared that the report was 
Lucille Parsons Vanderbilt re-i«. ‘siur on democracy.” He said 


The first is whether, in view of|Ceived a divorce from George W.\that the entire Middle East would 
the Arab opposition to the immi-| Vanderbilt of Sands Point, L. L.,|be forced into “‘the bosom of Soviet|Jew leaves the cursed and bloody 
gration of 100,000 Jews this recom-|today. Financial terms of ‘he set-| Russia.” 


GIMBELS OPEN THURSDAYS till 9 


| British managed to incorporate in 


limmaterial to the ultimate solution! 
of Palestine.” 

He declared that, irrespective of 
this commission, or past or future 
ones,: “the repatriation of Euro- 
pean Jews to Palestine will go on 
and will not cease until the last 


soil of Europe.” 


GIMBEL.S NEW SCISSORS 


4,49 reo. 6.98 EXPANSION AXLE JACK 


Gimbels has 500 of th 
scissors jacks we have 
Gimbel price will boost 


These jacks have ever 


e sturdiest, smoothest, 
ever carried. The low 
your motoring budget. 
ything. They will fit 


under the lowest car; they will lift 5000 
ounds. The steel is light weight. The ‘ball 


aring assures easy 0} 
Tire and Auto Shop, 


we will express or freight collect 


eration. Write, phone. 
Gimbels Sixth Floor. 


beyond Jelivery, within 600 miles 


! 13 


Se = . = 


Open Thursdays til @ 


the 
specialty 
corner 


ntlemen look to your ties! 


Maybe this selfsame stripe, this identical check flows wide and haridsome down 
your shirt front. Handle those neckties gently, men! Women are taking over rayon 
surah. What other fabric has such elegance, such a dashing, dandy-ish Ex. 
wardian look? These particular rayon surahs have the handle of heavy tie silks, 
fall stiff and swirling. We show 3 styles—any one elegant undér a mink scarf 


or topped with a simple, crisp white straw. Specialty Corner, Gimbels Third Floar, 


"OF 8 » & _ 


MY i spvew 


ae 


otal 


+ ts 
~* 


oY 


a 


SS ee ae tt tS 


ee 


srs 


ie 
bnd 


rep errrr) tere 
z bel ee ee oe 


54456 eaee o & 


5 io 


% 
CE ee ee ee 


ee 


Bley ge 
en ee t - 
oe 1 


“ 
—— 


. 


ate 


Nelle he, nt) 


epee 


. 
24 teen ter ree 


resveetityit, PPeTviititt tice ti. - ei! 
lhe ae 


high Regency cet/ar 


2-p¢c. rayon surah 
on brown stribed 


suit, navy and rose 


3.95 


pure wool Argyle 


sweaters 


for men 


The distinctive Argyle patterns are bright without 


screaming aloud. These 


sweaters will hold their 


shape because they’re 100% pure wool—because 
they have ribbing around the neck, armholes and 


waist. Blue and ‘yellow, 
red Argyle plaids. The 


red and tan, green and 
sizes are small, medium, 


large. Write, telephone, come. Gimbeis 6th Floor. 
ahipping charBe 13c beyond delivery area, toithin 600 miles 


sird & Broadway, New Y 


ork 1,N.Y. PEnn. 86-5100 


9. 98 ld 


for 8 and 3 passenger coupe models 


500 sets! 
auto seat 


Gimbels has 500 sets o 





coaches, sedans, club coupes 


sailcloth 





covers 


f these tough-wearing, 


good-looking sailcloth seat covers. Seams are 
sturdily stitched, piped with white simulated 
leather. Elastic inserts for paper-on-the-wall 


fit. Covers fit most ’3f 


’ to ’42 models. Tell us 


make, model, type of front seat. Maroon or 


royal. Write or phone. 


Gimbels Sixth Floor 


shipping charge 190 beyond delivery crea, within 600 miles 


Srd & Broadway, New York 1,N.Y. PEnn ¢-5100....| GIMBELS OPEN THURSDAYS till 9 


? 


checks. Sizes 10 to eB. rn fC rayon surah. Géth- 


ered midriff. 10° to 


classic shirtwaist in 


brown striped rayon 
surah. Sizes 10 to 


16... cece BOOS 


| 


33rd & Broadway, New York 1, N. Y., PEna 6508 





14 L+ + 


Sa 
» BARS JEWISH STATE, 


i> call 


be 


Black - on - Brown! —a 
Rogers Peet Style-leader! 
young men are 
asking for it than any/paiestine states would result in 


More 


other hat. 


Its new, narrow brim 
gives the correct modern equality 
touch. Its lustrous black 
band is not only fashion- 


able but practical! 
$10. 


Rogers 


1 ebel that yall charach 


Fifth Avenue at 4ist Street 
13th Street at Broadway 
Warren Street at Broadway 
And in Boston 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, 


Text of President Truman’s Statement 
On Report by Committee on Palestine 


PALESTINE INQUIRY | 


WASHINGTON, April 30 (AP)—Follow:ng is the text of 
en the Palestine 


President Truman’s statement tonight 
report: 

I ani very happy that the request which I made for the 
immediate admission of 100,000 Jews into Palestine has been 
unanimously endorsed by the Anglo-Americar Committee of In- 
quiry. The transference of these unfortunate people should now be 
accomplished with the greatest dispatch. The protection and 
safeguarding of the holy places in Palestine sacred to Moslem, 
Christian and Jew is adequately provided :n the report. 

One of the significant features in the report is that it aims 
to insure complete protection to the Arab pepulation in Pales- 
tine by guararteeing their civilian and religious rights, and by 
recommending measures for the constant improvement in their 
cultural, educational and economic position. 

I am also pleased that thé committee recommends in effect 
the abrogation of the White Paper of 1939, including existing 
restrictions on immigration and land acquisition, to permit the 
further development of the Jewish national home. It is aiso 
gratifying that the report also envisages the carrying out of 
large-scale economic development projects ia Palestine which 
would facilitate further immigration and be of benefit to the 
entire population. : 

In addition to these immediate objectives, the report deals 
with many other questions of long-range poiitical policies and 
questions of international law which require careful study and 
which I will take under advisement. 


ooo 


Jewish quarters “that Palestine/improvement of education stand- 
has in some way been ceded Orlards would b2 possible only b 
y dy & 
granted as their state to the Jews ? 
of the world, that every Jew every- substantial reduction in expendi 
where is, merely because he is a/*¥re# for security. 
Jew, a citizen of Palestine and} Finally, the committee strong- 
therefore can enter Palestine as of/ly recommended to each Govern- 
right without regard to conditions)ment that if its report were 
imposed by the Government Upon/, opted it should be made clear to 
entry, and that therefore there can Jews and Arabs that any attempt 
na bg Ae aby ty ation of JewS)rrom either side by threats of vio- 
: lence, terroris th iza- 
In recommending repeal of the tien or tse my egal. Pee roe ~ 
land-transfer regulations of 1940, prevent its axecution would be 
the committee said they should be| resolutely suppressed | 
—— ~¢ a ge on! To this end the view expressed) 
a policy of freedom of sale, case! 
or use of land irrespective of race, _ pr Rm igh song | eS 
community or ¢ and providing! with the Maidatory in the sup- 
a a y alhnr ype pression of terrorism and of illegal 
vators mmigration “and in the mainten- 
. ance of that law and order through- 


. Specifically, the report recom- 4 
jequal importance with that of the) ended invalidation of leases and ~ — Sua teiaiion the cam 


Jews, It urged preperation imme-| .onve vide 
diately of measures “designed to aay ne agen) Ka geen —_ immigrants. 
\bridge the gap which now exists| munity or creed might be em- In recommending the admission 
jand raise the Arab standard of/ploved on or about such land. of 100,000 Jews to Palestine the 
iliving to that of the Jews.” A further recommendation was |°O™mittee conceded that this would 

|provide a refuge for only part of 


the 500,000 who wished or might 


Continued From Page 1 
| 


|committee proposed that Palestine 
be continued as a British mandate 
pending execution of a trusteeship 
under the United Nations. It pre- 
dicted a long period of trusteeship 
that would prove burdensome to| 
any single Government, but which 
could be lightened by the coopera- 
tion and understanding of other) 
United Nations. 
At the root of the long and 
bloody struggle of Jew and Arab) 
for dominance of Palestine, the 
committee discerned a deep-seated 
and intense fear of each side that 
the other might attain the as- 
cendancy. The resuiting struggle 
for a numerical majority has be- 
deviled relations between the 
groups through the centuries and 
would be continued unless made 
|purposeless in a self-government 
constitution, the report aserted. 
“We have reached the conclu- 
jsion,” said the report, “that the 
[hostility between Jews and Arabs, 
and in particuJar the determina- 
tion of each to achieve domination, 
if necessary by violence, make it 
almost certain that now, and for 
some time to come, any attempt to 
establish either an independent 
Palestinian state or independent 


civil strife such as might threaten 
jthe peace of the worid.” 

The committee’s insistence on 
of standards between 
\Jews and Arabs in Palestine ran 
through the entire report but found 
fullest expression in its Recom- 
mendation No. 5. 

| In this the committee, looking 
ito a form of ultimate self-govern- 
ment consistent with the three 
major principles, observed that the 
| mandatory or trustee should pro- 
claim the principle that Arab eco- 
nomic, educational and political 
advancement in Palestine was of 


| 


In this way the committee sug-|that the Government closely su- 
gested that the two peoples could) nervise holy places such as the Sea 


ARABS RAP REPORT, 


WEDNESDAY, MAY Il, 1946. 


ish and Arab organizations every- 
where. . 

To the Arab Office, for instance, 
the recommendations are “nothing 
short of an outrage on the natural 
rights and legitimate aspirations of 
the Arabs.” ey will lead to “ev- 
erlasting subjection” and they 
will “inaugurate a new era of bit- 
terness, conflict and utmost insta- 
bility,” it adds, with much more of 
a similer naturs. 

The Jewish Agency, while wel- 
coming the proposal to admit 
100,000 Jews and to permit land 
transfers, claims that the “central 
problem of the homeless, stateless 


JEWS COOL T0 GAIN 


Continued From Page 1 


ment that “if British forces were 
withdrawn there would be immedi- 
ate and prolonged bloodshed” is 
emphasized here. 

The House of Commons this 
afternoon heard Colonial Secretary 


George H. Hall denounce the Tel) Wish people has been left un- 
Aviv attack. touched by the report,” for a “na- 
Members of Parliament will not! tional home cannot really be se- 
receive copies of the report until 1|cured save within the framework, 
o'clock tomorrow morning so that/of the Jewish State. 
they will only begin studying it to-| F rye as ita 
morrow. Government officials, it/TQ SHARE ELECTORAL LIST 
is stated, will want some time to ‘aiiiasd a 
give it careful consideration s0 : 
there is not likely to be any deci.| humanian Liberal Party to Join 
sion or even a parliamentary de-| Communists on Ticket 
bate about it for a few weeks aia) 
Moreover, the British are naturally BUCHAREST. yp oy April! 
anxious to get the United States 30--B 99 to 31 th dis-| 
Government's reaction. They were|°°-By ® vote o » the 
happiest when Washington agreed |sident Liberal party s central com- 
to take part in the joint commit- | mittee decided yesterday to share, 
tee and there is no intention to let!common electoral liste with the 
that link be broken. Communists after its leader, Vice 
Held Thankless Burden Premier George Tatarescu, told the 
That British troops, according|committee that friendship with the, 
to the committee's report, should|Soviet Union must be the founda- 
remain in Palestine, is a bitter-ition of Rumania’s foreign policy 
sweet suggestion. “ 
and warned “that most serious 


However, the desire to put an) 
end once and for all to the invidi-|\¢angers would threaten Rumania 


ous, hazardous, costly and thank-|if the elections would bring into) 
less burden of Palestine is so great power elements that proved unable) 
that if it could be done with cntety |" grasp the commands of Rume- 
to British imperial interests they nia's new foreign policy.” 
would be glad to pull out tomor-| ‘Thus the Government will have. 
row. So that when the report say8\Communists, Social Democrats, 
that there should be no attempt to'patarescu's Liberals. the recently 
establish an independent Pales-|created National Popular party 
tinjan State but that the mandate/ang « break-away faction of the! 
or a long trusteeship should »e con-| National Peasant party lined up| 
tinued, the British want it made) with it at the polis. 
very clear that they wouid like! listen te 5. a6 be i OED 
to share their burden. + eraployngent worrtes, thirty- 
What the Arab Office and the|day annual vacation with pay. 
Jewish Agency said here today is|Call at your nearest Navy Recruit- 
undoubtedly being echoed by Jew-'ing Station at once. 


Thrill to 


HEARAS 
Permanent 
Boat Salesroom 


678 Avenue of the Americas 
(Formerly Sixth Ave.) at 2ist te 22nd Street 


Open Daily 12 Noon to 9 P. M. 
Seturday 10 to 6 


Here right now !—Famous-name boats, including 
“Zip” sloops, Palmer Scott's “Wood Pussy” and 
“Weasel,” “Chemoid'’s” plastic top-o-car boata, 
“Lamolite” and “Century Aircraft” dinghies! A 
complete line of marine accessories—-ready fer 
immediate delivery. You'll find them all at 
HEARNS block-long permanent salesroom! 


Branch of HEARN DEPT. STORES, INC. MANHATTAN—BSRONX —WEWARK 


RE HPP. 


be impelled to emigrate from) 
Europe. The committee proposed 
that priority de granted displaced) 
Jews still in camps in the Ameri- 
can and British zones in Germany, 


Tremont Streét at Bromfield Street 


be brought to “a full appreciation|of Galilee to protect them from 
lof their common interest and com-| desecration and from uses that of- 
‘mon destiny in the land where both’ fended the consciences of religious 


WALLACHS 


belong.” les. 


VETERANS 
OF 
WORLD WAR II 


Our Men's Clothing Shop 
continues to devote every 
Thursday exclusively to 
you. We wish our stocks 
of suits, topcoats, sports 
jackets and slacks were 
not so critically inade- 
quate... but veterans get 
all we have every Thurs- 
day. On other days we'll 
go right on serving you 


to the best of our ability. 


MEN'S CLOTHING 


MAIN FLOOR 


De PINNA 


FIFTH AVENUE At S2ee STeEET 


VETERANS 
of WORLD WAR II 


are cordially invited to attend 
the Sth in a series of lectures 
on Retailing & Merchandising 
held every Thursday evening et 
7:30 P. M. at City College, 23 
St. & Lex. Ave., Rm. 4N in co- 
operation with City Cellege 
Faculty 


ADMISSION FREE 


xx*wnk 


HENRY MODEL! & CO., INC. 
VETERAN'S TRAINING DIVISION 


AUCTION SALE 


' SELL AT AUCTION 
Get quick and satisfactory 
cash results 


This is @ most advantageous 
time for ESTATES or INDI- 
VIDUAL OWNERS of Furniture, 


Furnishings, Silver, Rugs, Paint | 


ings, Objets d'Art, Libraries, 


ete., to disperse these belong- 


ings whether st your residence | 


or in storage, and convert inte 
the best cash values through 
Auction. Single or several 
pieces accepted. 
The Savoy Art Galleries of- 

fer you an experienced organi- 

| gation, spacious galleries ideally | 
located fer selling, and a select 

| clientele. 

Competition creates higher 


“Recognized sppraisers™ for | 


estates, inheritance tax and 


insurance purposes. 
CONSULT US 
WITHOUT OBLIGATION 


AW ae 


ART & AUCTION GALLERIES 
AUCTIONEERS + APPRAISERS 
& & Sth St.. New York 12, N. Y. 

Piese 3-996) __ 


The committee noted that a 
number of plans for large-scale 
agricultural and industrial devel- 
opment of Palestine were under 
consideration to enlarge its capac- 
ity to support an increasing pop- 
ulation, as well as improve living 


jshould be done that might lower 
the high degree of development at- 
tained by Jewish social services or 
halt the constant improvements 
being made in them. 
Government Ald to Arabs 

At the same time the Arabs 

would have to depend to a = 


Austria and Italy. 
The report recognized at the 
outset that Palestine alone could| 
not meet the emigration needs of) 
the Jewish victims of Nazi 
Fascist persecution but that coun- 
tries other than Palestine gave no) 
ange A Senn BO ae of “substantial assistance” 
neighboring Arab states affected” “nding homes for Jem = 
as: well as the Jewish Agency be; It declared, however, that the. 


invited t ] t . 
such developments from fatart’ te whole world shared the responsibil- 


finish. ‘ity for these victims of persecution’ 
Leaving aside the question of and, indeed, for the resettlement of 


feasibility of such projects, the all “displaced persons.” 


It was recommended, therefore 
committee said they would be cer- : ‘ 
tain to fail unless peace were se- that the Governments of the Unit- 


cured in the Holy Land. ed States and Britain in associa- 


tion with other countries, should 
Bn nag rye Oop es ee, ee endeavor immediately to find new 
prove the Arab standard of living homes for all such persons, irre- 
the committee suggested a com- spective of creed or nationality, 
plete reform of the educational! whose ties with their former com- 
tered with due regard to the man-|systems for both Jews and Arabs, munities had been irreparably 
date, which states in regard to im-|including introduction of compul-|Froken. 
migration that “the administra-'sory education within a reasonable ¥ 
tion of Palestine, while i 

f 


It said that = 


greater degree than the Jews on/€Ver, 


financial aid from the Government 
since they lacked the financial or- 
ganization of the Jewish commu- 
nity, the report said. “The Jews 
of Palestine should accept the 
necessity that taxation, raised 
from both Jews and Arabs, will 
have to be spent very largely on 
the Arabs in order to bridge the 
gap which now exists between the 
standard of living of the two peo- 
ples,” the committee declared. 
Pending establishment of a new 
trusteeship, the committee pro- 
posed that Palestine be adminis- 


| Col. Fox Wins Commendation | 


that the rights and position o Strict Government control of| Special to Tae New Yorn Tuxes 


other sections of the population|schools to do away with the “pres-| PRINCETON, N. J., April 30—| 
are not prejudiced, shall facilitate|ent excited emphasis on racialism|Col. Arthur E. Fox, former com- 
Jewish immigration under suitable|and the perversion of education for;mander of the Army units at} 


conditions.” | propaganda purposes,” careful su- 

While conceding the right of any|pervision of textbooks and cur-|the Army commendation ribbon in 
Jew to enter Palestine in accord-jricula, and inspection of schools|recognition of his wartime direc- 
ance with its laws, the committee) were urged as means of promoting/|tion of the Army specialized train- 
expressly disapproved the position| conciliation. ing program at Princeton, it was 
it said had been taken in some' The committee asserted that announced here today. 


Cusunes o* 


TIME RUNS TO GREAT LENGTHS 
IN A BUSINESS 128 YEARS OLD 


Customers frequently remark upon the great number of years that 
Brooks Brothers’ salesmen stay with us (and with them). They like the 
proficient, understanding service that comes from dealing with th e 
men over a long period of time—with men who get to know exactly 
what will suit them best. And they have always been reassured to know 
that, as younger men come up in the organization, they are trained in 
Brooks Brothers’ ways by old-timers whose experience is so deeply 
rooted in Brooks Brothers’ traditions. 

This kind of long-time employment has always been one of the char- 
acteristics that give Brooks Brothers a personality quite remarkable 
among retail stores. In addition to salesmen in our various merchandise 
divisions who are known to legions of our customers...there are many 
other men and women in departments back of the scenes who have been 
here through similarly long periods. Their record of service, in fact, is 
matched—and in many instances even surpassed—by only one other 
similar record in our bysiness: the length of time that customers stay 
with us, often beginning with Shorts and Eton Collars (long before a 


man can go to work) and continuing on through a whole lifetime. 


ESTABLISHED 1818 


BovoksAorvthers 


SCLOTHING 


——$— ae 
Mons Furnishings'aisz 


346 MADISON AVENUE, CORNER 44TH ST. NEW YORK 17, N. Y. 
46 NEWBURY, CORNER BERKELEY STREET, BOSTON 16, MASS. 


SUPPORT THE GREATER NEW YORK FUND 


Wear your LEN 


Princeton University, has received) 


Rich, lustrous felt 
flooded with softer, 
more glowing colors 


“10 


Wear your LEE 
SHELLTONE this way 
with your sport jackets 


and leisure wear 


SHELLTONE this way 


with all your business 


suits for sprirg.... 


You hear about LEE hats from Drew Pearson... see them today at WALLACHS! 


WALLACHS 7 WALLACHS 
WALLACHS | eee LOMS 


*Stores Open Evenings 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


STINE 


TEXT OF REPORT OF BRITISH-U. S. INQUIRY ON PALE 


Following ia the teat of the report of the Anglo-American 
Committee of Inquiry on problema of Jewa in Europe and Pales- 
tine, releaeed last night: 


Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry’ 


Report to 
The United States His 
Government in 
Lausanne, Switzerland, 
April 20, 1946. 


Majesty's Government 
the United Kingdom 


PREFACE 


We were appointed by the Gov- 
ernments of the United States and 
of the United Kingdom as a joint 
body of Arerican and British 
membership, with the following 
Terms of moe na , countries outside Europe. 
4&1) To examine political, economic 

and social conditions in Pales- of ee ee ex 

tine as they bear upon the prob- 


by remedial 


settlement therein and tha well- 
being of the peoples now living 
therein. 

(2) To examine the position o! the 
Jews in those countries in Eu- 
rope where they have been the 
victims of Nazi and Fascist per- 
secution, and the practical 
measures taken or contemplated 


Report within one hundred 
twenty days of the inception 
our inquiry. 

We assembled in Washington on 
Friday, 4th January, 1946, and be- 
gan our public sessions on the fol- 

the United States on 18th J 
to be taken in those countries to|‘¢ United States on anuary 
enable them to live free from dis-/@"d resumed our public sessions in 
crimination and oppression and|London on 25th January. We left 
to make estimates of those who|f°r Hurope on 4th and Sth Febru- 
wish or will be impelled by their|®tY, and, working in subcommit- 


conditions to migrate to Pales-| proceeded to our investi 
tine or other countries outside tions in Germany, Poland, Czecho- 


Evirope. | eter MOR ie pebvenae aa 
(3) To hear the views of com reece. th Fe we flew 
jtent witnesses and to consult |to Cairo and, after sessions there, 
‘representative Arabs and Jews|reached Jerusalern on 6th March. 
on the problems of Palestine ag|In Palestine, our seasions were in- 
such problems are affected by|terspersed with visits to 
conditions subject to examirs-|‘ifferent parts of the country, dur- 
pion under paragraphs 1 and 2|!ng which we sought to acquaint 
above and by other relevant/Ourselves at first hand with its 
facts and circumstances, and to|Various characteristics and the 
make recommendations to His|Ways of life of its inhabitants. 
Majesty's Government and the Subcommittees visited the capitals 
Government of the United States|\°f Syris, Lebanon, ; Iraq, udi 
for ad interim handling of these|Arabia and Trans-Jordan to hear 
problems as well as for their|the views of the Arab Govern- 
permanent solution. iments and representatives of 
(4) To make such other recom-|bodies concerned with the subjects 
mendations to His Majeaty's| before us. We left Palestine on 
Government and the Govern-|28th March and have. concluded 
ment of the United States agiOur deliberations in Switzer- 
may be necessary to meet the land. * * * 
immediate needs arising from| We now submit the foll 
conditions subject to exarmina-|report. 


CHAPTER I 


Recommendations and Comments 


The European Problem awarded as far as possible in 1946 
and that actual immigration be 
Recommendation No.1. We have| pushed forward as rapi as con- 
to report that such information yo a will permit. 
we received about countries other) Comment. The number of Jewish 
than Palestine gave no hope of|survivors of Nasi = = — are 
| secution e 
substantial assistance in finding) seal far exceeds 100,000: indeed 
homes for Jews wishing or iM-\there are more than that number 
pelled to leave Europe. in Germany, Austria and Italy 
But Palestine alone cannot mest/alone. Although nearly a year has 
the emigration needs of the Jewish| passed since their liberation, the 
victims of Nazi and Fascist per-|majority of those in Germany and 
secution; the whole world shares Austria are still living in assembly 
responsibility for them and indeed centers, the so-called ‘‘camps,” is 
for the resettlement of all “dis-|land communities in the’ midst of 
placed persons.” \those at whose hands they suffered 
We therefore recommend that/so much. 
our Governments together, and in| In their interests and in the in- 
association with other countries,|terests of Europe, 


the centers 
should endeavor immediately to|should *s closed and their camp 
find new homes for all such “dis-\life ended. Most of them ha 
placed persons,” irrespective of cogent reasons for 
creed or nationality, whose ties leave re 
with their former communities |survivors of their 
have been irreparably broken. have any ties 
Though emigration will solve the countries in 
problems of some victims of per-|live. 
secution, the overwh ma-| Since the end of 
jority, including a erable has been done 
number of Jews, will continue to resettlement elsewhere. 
live in Burope. We recommend tion laws and 
therefore that our Governments entry to most 
endeavor to secure that immediate| time — i 
effect is given to the provision of aud restric 
the United Nattons Charter effect 
for “universal respect for, and ob-|Some can 
servation of, human rights and they have relati 
fundamerta! freedoms for all with-|cure inclusion 
out distinction as to race, sex,|Their number 


aeons neo that We know of no coun 


Comment, In lthe t majori 
Go ts, grea 
our vernmen in association te fu 


with other countries, should | én- 
deavor to find new homes for “dis- rere all of 
There they are 


lreceive a 
\elaewhere. There 
and re 


jo 
We bel 
they should be given an opportu- 
nity to do so at the possi- 
ble time. Furthermore, we have 
the assurances of the leaders of 


where 

; others may se- 
certain qu 
comparatively 


perman 
immigration policy. The conditions 
which we have seen in Burope are 
unprecedentod and so unlikely to 
that Sgocial geovisin ooald, and 
that s 
should be ale tn dating immi- 
gration laws to meet this unique 
and peculiarily distressing situa- 
tion. Futhermore, we believe that 
much could be accomplished—par- 


ticularly in regard to those “dis- 
placed persons,” including Jews, these ewragg — we = 
who have relatives in countries! \® r in pao Bo rary 
outside Europe—by a relaxation of (eve * most salutary effect upon) 
administrative regulations, in the @ , f th e | 
Our investigations have led us), oo ee ese certif- 
to believe that a considerable num-| bl a ty -y~ , as far as 
ber of Jews will continue to live | Poses @, r — _— in the) 
in most European countries. In| Ger rs an those liberated in 
our view the mass emigration of; rmany and Austria who are no 
all European Jews would be of /0nser in the centers but remain in 
service neither to the Jews them-|‘0se countries. We do not desire 
selves nor to Europe. Every effort tht other Jewish victims who wish 
should be made to enable the Jews °F Will be impelled by their circum- 
to rebuild their shattered commu-*t#nces to leave the countries) 
nities, while permitting those Jews Where they now are or that those 
who wish to do so to emigrate. In|Who fled from persecution before 
order to achieve this, restitution the outbreak of war should be ex- 
of Jewish property should be e?- cluded. Wer-appreciate that there 
fected as soon as possible. Our Will be difficulty in deciding ques-| 
investigations showed us that the tions of priority, but none the less 
Governments chiefly concerned had|W¢ urge that so far as possible 
for the most part already passed|*uch a system should be adhered 
legislation to this end. A real ob-\to, and that, in appl it, pri- 
gtacle, however, to individual ™@ry consideration should be given 
restitution is that the attempt to|to the aged and infirm, to the very 
give effect to this legislation is young and also to skilled workmen 
frequently a cause of active anti-|whose services will be needed for 
Semitism. We suggest that, for'many months on work rendered 
the reconstruction of the Jewish|necessary by the large influx. 
communities, restitution of their! It should be made clear that no 
corporate property, either through @dvan in the obtaining of a| 
reparations payments or through |certificate is to be gained by mi- 
other means, is of the first ~~ from one ~ tong A to an- 
rtance. i other or by entering Palestine 
Nazi occupetion has left behind) illegally. 


and issue of 100,000 certificates for 


tion under wong 2 above, 

ection in the Eu- 
ropean countries in question or 
by the provision of facilities for 
emigration to and settlement in 


upon us 
pedition 
lin dealing with the subjects com- 
lem of Jewish immigration and mitted to us for investigation, and 
‘requested to be furnished with our 


. nor an Arab state. (III) That the 


ways in which help can be given. 

ose who have opposed the ad- 
mission of these unfortunate peo- 
ple into Palestine should know that 
we have fully considered all that 
they have put before us. We hope 
that they will look upon the situ- 
ation again, that they will appre- 
ciate the considerations which have 
led us to our conclusion, and that 
above all, if they cannot see their 
way to help, at least they will not 
make the position of these suffer- 
ers more difficult. 


Principles of Government: 
No Arab, No Jewish State 


Recommendation No. 3. In order 


to dispose, once and for all, of the 
exclusive claims of Jews and Arabs 
to Palestine, we regard it as essen- 
tial that a clear statement of the 
following principles should be 
made: 

(I) That Jew shall not dominate 
Arab and Arab shall not dominate 
Jew in Palestine. (II) That Pales- 
tine shall be neither a Jewish state 


form of government ultimately to 
be established, shall, under inter- 
national guarantees, fully protect 
and preserve the interests in the 
Holy Land of Christendom and of 
the Moslem and Jewish faiths. 

Thus Palestine must ultimately 
become a state which guards the 
rights and interests of Moslems, 
Jews and Christians alike and ac- 
cords to the inhabitants, as a 
whole, the fullest measure of self- 
government consistent with the 
three paramount principles set 
forth above. 

Comment, Throughout the long 
and bloody struggle of Jew and 
Arab for dominance in Palestine, 
each crying fiercely: “This land is 
mine”’—-except for the brief refer- 
ence in the Report of the Royal 
Commission (Hereinafter referred 
to as the Peel Report) and the lit- 
tle evidence, written and oral, that 
we received on this point—the 
great interest of the Christian 
world in Palestine has been com- 
pletely overlooked, glossed over or 
brushed aside. 

We therefore emphatically de- 
clare that Palestine is a Holy Land, 
sacred to Christian, to Jew and to 


can never become, a land which 
any race or religion can justly 
claim as its very own, 

We further, in the same em- 
phatic way, affirm that the fact 
that it is the Holy Land, sets Pal- 
estine completely apart from other 
lands and dedicates it to the 
cepts and practices of the 
hood of man, not those of narrow 
nationalism. 


For another reason, in the light 
of its long history, and cularly 
its history of the last thirty years, 
Palestine cannot be regarded as 
either a purely Arab or a purely 
Jewish land. 

The Jews have a historic con- 
nection with the country. The Jew- 
ish National Home, though em- 
bodying.a minority of the - 
tion, is today a reality established 
under international guarantee, It 
has a right to continued existence, 
protection and development, 

Yet, Palestine is not, and never 
can be a purely Jewish land. It 

the crossroads of the Arab 
Its Arab wiation, de- 
ded from long-time 
of the area, rightly look upon Pal- 
estine as their homeland. 

t is, therefore, neither just nor 
een ge that Palestine should 

either an Areb state 


minority, or a Jewish state, in 
which a Jewish majority would 
control that of an Arab minority. 
In neither case would minority 
tees afford adequate 

on for the subordinated group. 

A Palestinian put the matter 
thus: “In the hearts of us Jews 
there has always been a fear that 
some day this country would be 
turned into an Arab state and the! 
Arabs would rule over. us. This 
fear has at times reached the pro- 
portions of terror. * * * Now this 


j;@ame feeling of fear has started 


up in the hearts of Arabs * * * 
fear lest the Jews acquire the 
ascendancy and rule over them.” 

Palestine, then, must be estab- 
lished as a country in which the 
legitimate national aspirations of 
both Jews and Arabs can be recon- 
ciled without either side fearing 
the ascendancy of the other. In 
our view this cannot be done under 
any form of constitution in which 
a mére numerical majority is de- 
cisive, vince it is precisely the 
struggie for a numerical majority 


| 


tions. To ensure genuine self-| 


government for both the Arab and 
the Jewish communities, this 
wy oy must be made purposeless 
by the constitution itself. 


Mandate and United 
Nations Trusteeship 


dation No. 4. We have 

reach the conclusion that the! 
hostihty between Jews and Arabs) 
and, in particular, the determina- 
tion of each to achieve domina- 
tion, if necessary by violence, 
make it almost certain that, now 
and for some time to come, any at- 
tempt to establish either an inde- 
pendent Palestinian state or inde- 
pendent Palestinian states would 
result tm civil strife such as might 
threaten the peace of the world. 
We therefore recommend that, un- 
til this hostility disappears, the 
Government of Palestine be con- 
tinued as at present under man-) 
date pend'ng the execution of a’ 
trusteeship agreement under the 
United Nations. 
Comment, We recognize that in, 
view of the powerful forces both) 
Arab and Jewish, operating from 
outside Palestine, the task of, 





it a legacy of anti-Semitism. This) Receiving so large a number will 
cannot be combated by legislation|be a heavy burden on Palestine. 
alone. 
antidotes are the enforcement by|will shoulder it and that they wil! 
each Government of teed|have the full covoperation of the 
civil liberties and rights, a|Jewish y 

program of education in the posi Difficult problems will confront 
tive principles of democracy, the|those responsible for organizing 
sanction of a ‘strong world public|and carrying out the movement. 
opinion—combined with economic|The many organizations—public 
recovery and rtability. and private—working in Europe 


ee will certainly render all the aid 
Refugee Immigration they can; we mention UNRRA 
Into Palestine 


especially. Cooperation by all 
throughout is necoasary. . 

Recommendation No. 2. We rec-|) We are sure that the Govern- 
ommend (a) that 100,000 certifi-|ment of the United States, which 
cates be authorized immediately|has shown such keen interest in 
for the admission into Palestine of|this matter, will participate vig- 
Jews who have been the Victims/orously and generously with the 
of Nazi and Fascist persecution;|Government of Great Britain in 
(b) that these certificates be ite fulfillment. ‘here are many 


The only really effective|We feel sure that the authorities) 


Great Britain, as mandatory, has) 
not been easy. The Peel Commis-| 
sion declared in 1937 that the man- 
date was unworkable, and the 
Permanent Mandates Commission) 
of the League of Nations there- 
upon pointed out that it became) 
almost unworkable once it was 
publicly declared to be so by such 
a body. Two years later the Brit- 
ish Government, having come to) 
the conclusion that the alternative 
of partition proposed by the Peel) 
Commission was also unworkable, 
jannounced their intention of tak-! 


ing steps to terminate the mandate || 
by the establishment of an inde- || 


pendent Palestine state. 

Our recommendations are based) 
on what we believe at this stage 
to be as fair a measure of justice; 
to all as we can find in view of 


inhabitants|®"4 politieal advancement in Pal- 


once 


~ living to that of the Jevs; and so|'" the 


appreciation of their common in-| 


call attension to the discrepancies, 


community in Palestine, with the 
assistance of outside Jewish 
which pedevils Arab-Jewish rela-|izations; 


aging the ‘formation by the Arabs 


HOW LAND DEALS ARE LIMITED IN PALESTINE 


iit 
il . 


A 


4444S SE 


4 
Yt; YOSEF 


May 1, 1046 


Under the Land Transfer Regulations of 1940 zones were set|”* 


up as shown on the above map, which is adapted from one annexed 
to the Arglo-American commission's report. In Zone A “transfers 
of land save to a Palestinian Arab are prohibited except in special 


circumstances.” In Zone B “transfers of Jand by a Palestinian Arab! 
Moslem alike; and because it is a|Save to # Palestinian Arab are prohibited except in special cir-| 
owing |Holy Land, Palestine is not, and/ cumstances.” In a Free Zone there are no restrictions on transfers, 


standard of living of the two peo- 
ples. 


Future Immigration Policy 
Recommendation No. 6. We rec- 


what has gone before and of ail 
that has been done. We recognize 
thaf they are not in accord with 
the claims of either party, and 
furthermore that they involve a 
departure from the recent policyjommend that pending the early 
of manda A reference to the United Nations 
We recognize that, if they are and the execution of a trusteeship 
a4topted, they will involve a lon ent, the mandatory should 
period of. trusteeship, which wills inister Palestine according to 
mean @ véry heavy burden for any|the mandate, which declares, with 
single Government to undertake,|regarc to immigration, that “the 
a burden which would be lightened/administration of Palestine, while 
if the difficulties were appreciated| insuring that the rights and posi- 
and the trustee had the support of/tion of other sections of the pop- 
other mernbers of the United Na-|ulation are not judiced, shall 
tions. facilitate Jewish mmigration un- 


Equality of Standards der suitable conditions.’ 


Comment, We have recom- 
Recommendation No. 5. Looking mended the admission of 100,000 
toward a: form of ultimate self- 


|immigrants, victims of Nazi per- 
governmeht consistent with the sécution, as soon as possible, We 
three principles laid down in Rec- OW deal with the position after the 
ommendation No. 3, we recom-| #dmission of that number. We 
mend that the mandatory or trus-|C@nnot look far into the future. 
tee should proclaim the principle 


t Arab economic, ed 
omic, educational trusteeship agreement is executed 


it is our clear opinion that Pales- 
tine should be administered in ac- 
|cordance with the terms of the 
jmandate quoted above. 

Further than that we cannot go 
form of a recommendation. 
In this disordered world specula- 
tion as to the economic position of 
any country a few years ahead 
would be a hazardous proceeding. 
It is particularly difficult to pre- 
dict what, after a few years have 
passed, will be the economic and 

litical condition of Palestine. 

e hope that the present friction 
and turbulence will soon die away 
and be replaced by an era of 
|peace, absent so long from the 

oly Land; that the Jew and Arab 
will soon realize that collaboration 
‘ig to their mutual advantage, but 
'no one can say how long this will 
take. ’ 

The possibility of the country 
sustaining a largely increased pop 
ulation at a decent, standard of liv- 
ing depends largely on whether or 
not 
mendation No, 8 can be brought to 
fruition. 

The Peel Commission stated 
that political as well as economic 
jconsiderationg have to be taken 
into. account in regard to immigra- 
ltion, and recommended a “polit- 
teal high level” of 12,000 a year 


organ-, 
and we would stress that Ve cannot recommend the fixing 


nothing should be done which! 
would bring these social services’ 
down to the level of those provided! 
for the Arabs, or halt the constant) We desire. h to stat 

improvements now being made in pacman y nde rpattkganr bp peecegelinndl 
them. tain considerations which we agree 


We suggest that consideration be *0uld be taken into account in de- 


given to the advisability of encour! ants there should be in any pe- 


of an Arab community on the lines "0d. It is the right of every inde- 
of the Jewish community which Pendent nation to determine in the 
now largeiy controls and finances ‘"terests of its people the number 
Jewish sozial services. The Arabs of immigrants to be admitted to its 
will have to rely, to a far greater|!ands. Similarly it must, we think, 
extent then the Jews, on financial be conceded that it should be the 
aid from the Government. But the ight of the Government of Pales- 
Jews of Palestine should accept|tine to decide, having regard to 
the neceafity that taxation, raised|the well-being of all the people of 
from both Jews and Arabs, will|Palestine, the number of immi- 
have to be spent very largely on|grants to be admitted within any 
the Arabe in order to bridge the|given period. 

gap which now exists between the! In Palestine there is the Jewish 


estine is of — importance with 
that of the Jews; and should at 
prepare measures designed to 
bridge p which row exists 
and raise the Arab standard of 


bring the two peoples to a full! 


ang common destiny in the 
land where both belong. 

Our examination of 
conditions; in Palestine led us to 
the conclusion that one of the chief 
causes of friction is the great dis- 
parity between the Jewish and 
Arab staniards of living. Even un- 
der conditions of war, which 
brought cansiderable fine.ncial ben- 
efits to the Arabs, this disparity 
has not been appreciably reduced. 
Only by a deliberate anc carefully 
planned policy on the part of the 
mandatory can the Arab standard 
of living be raised to that of the 
Jews. In ‘stressing the need for 
such a policy we would particularly 





between the social services, includ- 
ing hospitals, available in Pales-| 
tine for Jaws and Arabs. 


Would Keep Up Social Ald 
We fully recognize that the Jew- 
ish social ‘services are financed to 
a very gréat extent by the Jewish 


for annual immigryation in the fu- 
ture. There are too many uncer- 
tain factors, 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Chapter Page 


I—Recommendations and Comment..........15 

Ii—The Position of the Jews in Europe 

Ili—The Political Situation in Palestine.... 
IV—Geography and Economics 

V-—The Jewish Attitude 

Vi—The Arab Attitude............ 
Vii—Christian Interests in Palestine 
Vili—Jews, Arabs and Government 
IX—Public Security 

X—General.... 


Appéndix 


Ii—European Jewry—Position in Various 
Countries ited ORE ye 
Iil—Estimated Jewish Population of Europe. .19 
IV—Palestine: Historical Background........19 
V—Palestine: Public Security .20 
VI—The Mandate....... 

ViI—List of Staff 


National Home, created in conse-jestine. Such a policy, suggested by|war development; we could wish 
uence of the Balfour Declaration.|the Peel Commission, is consistent|that means might be found for 
ome may think that that declara-jwith their proposed solution, par-|projects of larger range and on & 

tion was wrong and should notitition, but scarcely with that put|more ambitious scale; but we rec- 

have been made; some that it was|/forward by us. ognize that until political peace is 

a conception on a@ grand scale and| The leases granted by the . ewish|restored there is great difficulty in 

that effect can be given to one of/National Fund contain a provision|raising the necessary funds wheth- 

the most daring and significantithat no labor other than Jewish/er from revenue or borrowing. 
colonization plans in history. Con-/shall be employed by the lessee on| Meanwhile it Is suggested that 
troversy ag to which view is rightior about or in conection with the|the Government should acquire 
is fruitless. The national home is/jand subject to the lease, and a|/Powers, at present iacking, to in- 


lans referred to in Recom-| 


termining what number of immi-| 


lliard of living. 
| also: racognized in the Peel Report) 


there. Its roots are deep in the further provision that a sublease vestigate fully the extent cf the 


soil of Palestine. It cannot be ar- 
gued out of existence; neither can 
the achievements cf the Jewish 
pioneers. 

The Government of Palestine in 
having regard to the well-being of 
all the le of Palestine cannot 
ignore the interests of so large a 
section of the population. It can- 
not ignore the achievements of the 
last quarter of a century. No Gov- 
ernment of Palestine doing its 
duty to the people of that land can 
fail to do its best not only to main- 
tain the national home but also to 
foster its proper development and 
such development must, in our 
view, involve immigration. 


The well-being of all the people 

of Palestine, be they Jews, Arabs 
or neither, must be the governing 
consideration. We reject the view 
that there shall be no further Jew- 
ish immigration into Palestine 
without Arab acquiescence, a view 
which would result in the Arab 
dominating the Jew. We also re- 
jject the insistent Jewish demand 
that forced Jewish immigration! 
must proceed apace in order to) 
produce as quickly as possible a 
Jewish majority and a Jewish 
State. The well-being of the Jews 
must not be subordinated to that 
of the Arabs; nor that of the 
Arabs to the Jews. The well-being 
of both, the economic situation of 
Palestine as a whole, the degree of 
execution of plans for further de- 
velopment, all have to be carefully 
considered in deciding the number 
of immigrants for any particular 
riod. 
Palestine is a land sacred to! 
three faiths and must not become) 
the land of any one of them to, 
jthe exclusion of the others, and 
Jewish immigration for the devel- 
opment of the national home must) 
not become a policy of discrimi-| 
nation against other immigrants. 
Any person, therefore, who desires 
lund is quahfied under applicable 
‘laws to enter Palestine must not 
be refused admission or subjected 
to discrimination on the ground 
that he is not a Jew. All provi- 
sions respecting immigration must 
be drawn, executed and applied 
with that principle always firmly 
in mind. 


Further, while we recognize that) 
jany Jew who enters Palestine in 





accordance with its laws is there) 
jof right, we expressly disapprove) 
\of the position taken in some Jew-| 
j\ish quarters that Palestine has in 
jgome way been céded or granted 
as their state to the Jews of the 
world, that every Jew everywhere 
jis, me@rely because he is a Jew, a 
\citize: of Palestine and therefore) 
jcan «@nter Palestine as of right) 
iwithout regard to conditions im-| 
posed by the Government upon en-, 
try and that therefore there can) 
be no illegal immigration of Jews! 
linto Palestine. We declare and af- 





laws is an illegal immigrant. | 
Lané Policy 


. 7. (a) We from the start and jhroughout, in fore, 
Recommendations No. 7. (a 3 full consideration ar.d cooperation|spent on Arab education. This will: 


jreconimend that the land transfer 
lregulations of 1940 be rescinded 
land replaced by regulations 
jon a policy of freedom in the sale, 
lease or use of land, irrespective 
jof rave, community or creed and 
\providing adequate protection for) 
the interests of small owners and) 
tenant cultivators. (b) We further! 
reconimend that steps be taken to) 
irender nugatory and to prohibit, 
provisions in conveyances, leases 
and agreements relating to land’ 
which stipulate that only members 
of one race, community or creed) 
may be employed on or about or) 
in connection therewith. (c) We) 
recommend that the Government 
should exercise such close super- 
vision over the holy ponerse and lo-| 
jcalities such as the Sea of Galilee) 
‘and. its vicinity as will protect) 
‘thern from desecration an 


from} 
uses which offend the conscience 
of religious people; and that such} 
laws as are required for this pur-) 
pose be enacted forthwith. 
| Comment. The Land Transfers, 
|Regulations of 1940 sought to pro-) 
itect the Arab tenant and —_ 
owner by prohibiting the sale of! 
land eave to a Palestinian Arab in) 
lone zone, by restricting such sales) 
lin ancther, and allowing unrestrict-) 
‘ed sale of land only in the third) 
izone. Their effect has been such) 
as tc amount to discrimination 
against the Jews; their tendency 
is to segregate and keep separate 
Arabe and Jews. In the zones 
where sales are prohibited or re-| 
stricted, they have protected the) 
Arad from the temptation to dis- 
pose of his land, on which his live- 
\liho»d and that of his family so 
loften depend, for a sum out of all 
pr portion to its real value. 
Though made with the object of| 
maintaining the existing standard) 
of ving of Arab cultivators, and, 
,of preventing the creation of a con- 
| siderable landless Arab population,| 
ithew afford no protection to the 
Ara» living in the free zone. He) 
may sell his land for a fantastic) 
price and add to the congestion in| 
|the other zones by moving there.) 
|An Arab living a short distance 
away, just across the zone bound-| 
jary,; <annot obtain anything ap- 
protinating the same sum for) 
lance of equal quality. 
We are opposed to any legisla-| 
tion’ cr restrictions discriminating 
against Jew or Arab. We recog-| 
nize the need for protecting the 
Ara) small owner and tenant, for 
providing against a large landless 
Ara» population, for maintaining, 
indeed for raising, the Arab stand-| 
is necessity was) 





' 





(Chapter [X, paragraph 10) which | 
endcrsed the following principles) 
of earlver reports, that (1) unless) 


there is a marked change in the! 


|r. taods of cultivation the land in| 


Palestine is unable to support a) 
large increase in population, and 
(fi) there is already congestion on 
the ‘and in the hill districts. Those 
principles are as true, if not truer, 
todry, | 

We do not believe that the neces-; 
‘sary protection for the Arab can 
jbe provided only by confining the 
Jew: to particular portions of Pal- 


_ 


land 


shy}! contain similar terms. 

As we have said, we are op- 
posed to such discrimination. We 
appreciate that one of the reasons 
for such provisions was to secure 
employment for Jewish 
on the land. We do not think that 
that object justifies the retention 
of such stipulations which are 
harmful to cooperation and under- 
standing between Arab and Jew. 

Land acquired by the Jewish 
National Fund or for a Wagqf by 


the Supreme Moslem Council be-; 


comes inalienable. The Peel Com- 
mission expressed the view in its 
report (Chapter IX, paragraph 80) 
that caution on 
Government in disposing of state 
domain to these bodies was desir- 
able. The situation required watch- 
ing. It would not be to the inter- 
ests of the inhabitants of Palestine 


if too large a proportion of the land) 


should become inalienable, whether 
held by one organization or an- 
other. 

In the small, thickly populated 
country of Palestine, with its 
rapidly increasing 
in the interest of 
alike that all land should be de- 


veloped and A to the fullest ae 
sible use. settlement of title 
to land should 


the part of the trade 


| 


roceed as quickly 





as possible and the development) 
of state lands, not required for pub- 
lic purposes and cépable of use, 
should be facilitated. 

The Holy Land of Palestine con-| 
tains within its borders and 
thro out ite territories places 
sac to the followers of three 
great religions. The “Lido,” with! 
its dancing and swing music on the! 
shore of the Sea of Galilee, offends 
the sensibilities of many Christian) 
people. Reports cams to our notice) 
of other projects, th: completion of | 
which would be equally objection- 
able. We, therefore, feel it right by) 
our recommendation. to emphasize 
the necessity for close supervision) 
and to recommend the strengthen-| 

of the law should that be re-| 
quired. 


Economie Development 

m No. 8. Various 
plans for large-scale agricultural) 
industrial development in) 
Palestine have been presented for 
our consideration. These projects, 
if successfully carried into effect, 
could not only greatly enlarge the) 
capacity of the country to support 
an increasing population but also 
raise the living standards of Jew| 
and Arab alike. | 


We are not in a position to assess) 
the soundness of these specific 
plans, but we cannot siate too! 
strongly that, however technical-| 
ly feasible they may be, they wili) 
fail unless there is peace in Pales-' 
tine. Moreover, their full success) 


We recommend threfore that the 
examination, discuss:on and execu- 
tion of these plans -be conducted, 


not only-with the Jewish Agency) 


fected. 
| 


rectly 

Comment. The building of the! 
Jewish economy ha, enjoyed the) 
advantage of abundant capital,| 
provided on such ter:ns as to make} 
economic return a s2candary con-| 
sideration. The Arabs have had no 
such advantage. In principle we do 
not think it wise or appropriate 
that plans such as the project for 
a Jordan Valley Authority should, 
if judged technicaky sound, be! 
undertaken by any rivate organ-| 
ization, even though that organiza.-| 
tion, as suggested ty the Jewish! 
Agency, should give an assurance) 
of Arab benefits ané Arab partici-| 
pation in the manag’ement, 

Such proposals, »y reason of| 
their magnitude anc far-reaching! 
effects, should be conceived as 
public projects, suitable for gov-| 
ernment enterprise and accepted) 
only provided that ‘they are cal-| 
culated to benefit al parts of the 
population. But the tndertaking of | 
a worthwhile project. should not be 
held up merely from financial con- 
siderations which ciuld be over-! 
come with the aid of semi-philan-| 
thropic resources. Some compro-| 
mise should not *e impossible 
which would conibine Jewish! 
finance with Govertiment respon- 
sibility and control. | 

We welcome the knowledge that! 
the Government of Palestine has! 
itself prepared progeams of post-| 


| 


country’s water resources, to con- 
trol the use of unde water 
and to determine rights to surface 
water. } 

We doubt whether Palestine can 
expand its economy to the full, 
having regard to its limited nat- 
ural resources, without a fuil and 
free interchange of goods and serv- 
ices with neighboring countries. In 
some respects, indeed, ag in cer- 
tain projects vapor water sup- 
ply, their active collaboration is 
indispensable to full development 
on an economic basis. 

The removal of Article 18 of the 
mandate would the way to 
those comprehensive tariff and 
ents, not conflicting 
with any international obligations 
that might be accepted the 
mandatory or trustee, which could 
ultimately lead to something like 
a customs union—an objective al- 
ready in mind as between the sur- 
rounding countries of the Arab 
League. 


Education 
Recommendation No. 9. We rec- 


ulation, it is| ommend that, in the interests of 
ews and Arabs/the conciliation of the two peoples 


and of general improvement of the 
Arab standard of living, the edu- 
cational system of both Jews and 
Arabs be reformed, including the 
introduction of compulsory educa- 
tion within a reasonable time. 

Comment. In Chapter XVI of 
the Peel Report, the features 
of the educational system of Pal- 
estine and the great disparty be- 
tween the money spent on Arab 
and Jewish education were pointed 
out. The report also emphasized 
that both Jewish and Arab educa- 
tion in Palestine were nationalistic 
in character. Particular attention 
was called to nationalist propo- 
ganda in Arab schools. 

Our Mmvestigations disclosed that 
today the Jewish schools also— 
controlled and largely financed by 
the Jewish community—are im- 
bued with a fiery spirit of na- 
tionalism. They have become most 
effective agencies for inculcating 
& spirit of aggressive Hebrew na- 
tionalism. fe would urge most 
strongly that adequate control 
must be exercised by the Govern- 
ment over the education of both 
Jews and Arabs in order to do 
away with the present excited 
emphasis on racialism and the per- 
version of education for propa- 
ganda purposes. The Government 
should ensure, by a careful super- 
vision of text books and curricula, 
and by inspection of schools that 
education contributes to the con- 
ciliation of the two peoples. 

We believe further that a large! 
share of responsibility for Arab 
education might well be assumed 
by an Arab community, simiiar to 
the Jewish community already 
established in Palestine. But iff 


‘requires the willing cooperation of|the Arab and Jev’ish communities 
|We cannot construct # yardstick firm, that any immigrant Jew who adjacent Arab states, since they are to set thems¢lves the goal of, 
for anntal immigration. Until & enter, Palestine contrary to its are not merely Palestinian projects. compulsory education, 


a much 
higher proportion of the annuab 
Palestinian budget must be de- 
voted to educatinn than hereto. 
most of which will be 


only be possible if the propcrtion; 


based | but also with the governments of of the budget now devoted to 
ithe neighboring Arab states di-|security can be substantially re~ 


duced. , 

We would also stress the urgent 
necessity of incréasing the facili-' 
ties for secondary, technical ang 
university education available to 
Arabs. The disparity between the 
standard of living of the two 
peoples, to which we have already 
drawn attention, is very lergely, 
due to the fact that the Jéwishk 
professional and middle-class soa 
largely outnumbers that of the 
Arabs. This diffetence can only be 
removed by a very substantial in- 
crease in the facilities for higher 
education available to Arabs, 


The Need for Peace 
in Palestine 


Recommendation No. 16. We 
recommend that, if this report id 
adopted, it should be made clear 
beyond all doubt to both Jews and 
Arabs that any attempt from 
either side, by threats of violence, 
by terrorism, or py the organiza 
tion or use of illegal armi*s td 
prevent ite execufion, will bé res4 
olutely suppresse:l. : 

Furthermore, we exprese the 
view that the Jewish Agency 
should at once resume active co< 
operation with the mandato*y in 
the suppression of terrorism ang 
of illegal immigration, and th the 
maintenance of that law and order 
throughout Palestine which ‘s es< 
sential for the good of all, includs 
ing the new immigrants. ; 


CHAPTER Il 
The Position of the Jews In Europe 


(1) We are required in para- 
graph 2 of our Terms of Reference 
“to examine the pdsition of the 
Jews in those countries in Europe 
where they have been the victims 
of Nazi and Fascis® persecution, 
and the practical nmreasures taken 
or contemplated to. be taken in 
those countries to enable them to 
live’ free from discrimination and 
oppression and to make estimates 
of those who wish “r will be im- 


lpelled by their conclitions to mi- 


grate to Palestine ¢r other coun- 
tries outside Europe.” 

(2) In order to filfill our task 
within the allotted period of 120 
days and on accowmit of the ur- 
gency of the problem, we divided 
into subcommittees, which between 
the 5th and 28th Fabruary, 1946, 
visited the America’, British and 
French zones of Germany and Aus- 
tria. Subcommittees also visited 
France, Poland, Czechoslovakia, 
Italy, Greece and: Switzerland. 
Circumstances did not permit us 
to go to Hungary, Rumania, Yu- 
gosiavia, Bulgaria or the Russian 
zone of Austria, and we did not 
visit the Russian zor-e of Germany 
after we were infermed by the 
Deputy Commander of the Soviet 
occupation forces that in that 
area there was no apecial Jewish 
problem. 

(3) There are about 98,000 Jews 
from other countries—displaced 
persons—now living in Germany, 
Austria and Italy, and a small ad- 
ditional number scatzered through- 


out the countries: of Europe: W@q 
found that the majority of thesq 
Jews in the American and Brit« 
ish zones of Germany and Austria 
were living in assembly ceaters, 
once known as “camps” where ac- 
commodation and maintenance 
were provided by the military aué 
thorities. 2 
The Jewish occupants of thesq 
centers are not all “displaced pers 
sons,” that is to say, persons oute 
side their national boundaries by 
reason of the war. Since the end 
of the war there has been a very 
considerable movement of Jew§ 
into the American and Britis 
zones of Germany and Austria. I 
is estimated that,:so far, some 30,¢ 
000 have come from Poland. Ther 
has also been some migratio 
though on a smaller scale, — 
Rumania and Hungary; this chow§ 
signs of increasing. Since we leff 
Europe there has been a slig:it reg 
striction in the movement cf mis 
grants generally, but the »osste 
bility that there may be a consid$ 
erable :acrease in the montis 
come must be borne in minc 
The officer commanding th@ 
American forces suggested th 
following as the reasons for th 
movement into the American zon 
of Germany: The expectation 
generous treatment, the provabi 
ity of finding re!ations theré, th 
spectal activity ir America cn 
half of Jewish rejief and the fee 


oO 


Continued on Following Page 





1946. 


16 


Investigation Group’s Report Discusses Flight of Jews From Centers of Persecution in Europe 


| SHIFT OF JEWISH 


L THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 


Sau.i Arabia may produce another|the two communities, and many 
stream converging on much the|Jewish citrus groves employ some 
same point of distribution. irregular Arab leader. Individual- 

ism is the characteristic form of 
Population enterprise in both sectors of the in- 


DURING WAR 


BS Ae Sane Me ao Y + 
oN ee 
seth 


Continued Fro in the concentration camps and; Even though many might be 
. mued From Preceding Fage | ony of them died. This must not|giad to join relatives and friends in 
s ing that the American zone wasibe forgotten. We.are concerned|other countries, the doors of those 

on the shortest routes to Palestine.|in this report with the living sur-|countries at present appear to be) 


POPULATIONS IN EUROPE 


oe, * 


| - 
*% 


J “ 


es SICELA > pee 


closed to them. They are resent- ‘ | 


* there is usually a center commit- 


" Germany and of Austria. 


te provides specialists to assist with 
s! 


n 


°" Agency 
ia and resettlement services, particu- 


‘t cerning projected emigration to 
* Palestine. 


ta 


® 
s 


(4) The nature of the accommo-/Vivors of European Jewry. 


dation of displaced Jews wiffered; We could harrov’ the feelings of|/ful because they are prevented 


widely in character. In some cen-jthose who read this report by 
ters barracks were used; in oth-|repetition of accounts we received 


and cottages... For exa:nple, in|not propose to do so. We wish to 
Hohne, commonly referred to asi|present a picture of the general 
Belsen, in the British zone of Ger-|situation as we sa‘v it. 
many, where 9.000 Jews were ac-| Few of the older people sur- 
commodated, the buildings were/vived; not many children, for spe- 
barracks formerly occupied by &icija] efforts seem to have been 
unit of the German army. At Bin-|made to destroy them. The ma- 
dermickel, in the American zone of|jority of the children who survived 
Austria, flats built to house work-|are orphans. The majority of the 
ers in the neighboring Goering|remaining survivors are young and 
» factory had been taken over, and/middle-aged people. The latter 
in the south of Italy entire seaside escaped death only by their strong 
villages had been made available physique enabling ‘hem to sustain 
for that purpose. either the ordeals of forced labor 
(5) In the American and Brit-|in concentration caps, or the = 
ish zones, where the bulk of these! vations accompanying hiding. e 
persons were found, they were ac-| young people have had little or no 
commodated in separate centers8/education save that of cruelty. It 
from other displaced persons, Or|ig not too much te say that they 
segregated volintarily within &/all owe their lives to liberation by 
i center. The maximum of self-ad-|the United Nations 
ministration is encouraged and; (41) These Jewish survivors have 
not emerged from toeir ordeals un- 
ing group activities and for deal- tally. It is rare indeed to find a 
ing with compia-nts. In many CeNn-\complete Jewish family. Those 
ters the occupants have their Own) yn. return to their old homes find 
courts for dealing with offensesithem destroyed oc occupied by 
and their own police. others, their busiriesses gone or 
(6) UNRRA has taken an in-\eise in other hands. They search 
creasing part in the relief and Te-ifor relatives, frequently under- 
h ilitation of these Jews. In the taking long journeys cn hearing AR 
autumn of 1944; it began to oper-|- mor that one has been seen in 
ate in Italy, and in February, 1945,' another part of the country or in 
took over administrative responsi-| sn nother center. 
bility for the larger centers in the Such was the system of the Ger- 
south of Italy. in the summer and) ..55 that it is difficult for them 
latter part of 1945, it was assist-\ over to establish the death of their 
ing the Army in the American gear ones. They are faced also 
zones of Germany and Austria. Atl with very great difficulties in se- 
the end of February last, UNRRA curing the restituticn of their prop- 
‘ assumed responsibility for the in-\.+y "In Germany and in Poland, 
ternal administration of Hohne and which were often ¢escribed to us 
it now administers other centers in “the cemetery: of European 
the British and French zones of| Jewry,” a Jew may see in the face 
of any man he lookr upon the mur- 
derer of his family. It is under- 
dabie that few find themselves 
to face such conditions. 


Private Assistance Cited 


Most centers in the Caines — 
States zones are now opera y 
UNRRA teams as agents for the| (12) In Poland, Hungary and 
Army, which provides the accom- Rumania, the chief desire is to get 
rnodation, food, clothing and medi-|out, to get away sornewhere where 
cal supplies. Voluntary agencies| there is & chance o* ee 
specially concerned with Jewish|new life, of finding some happi- 

+ persons huve been invited by mili-/ness, of living in peace and in _ 
tary authorities and UNRRA to|curity. In Germany also, where the 
give assistance and the American|/number of Jews has been reduced 
Jewish Joint Distribution Commit-|from about 500,00) in 1933 to 
tee, the Jewish Agency, and the| about 20,000 now, and mont traces 

‘Jewish Committee for Relief of Jewish life have been destroyed, 

» Abroad now have representatives there is a similar desire on the 

in the centers. The American Jew- part of a large proportion of the 


Y Cc ittee survivors to make a home else- 
ee ee oe where, preferably in Palestine. In 


Czechoslovakia, particularly in Bo- 
hemia and Moravia, and in Aus- 


hegith, welfare and other a 
such as the supply of kosher food, 
clothes, and material for spiritual|ttia, the position in regard to the 

The Jewish|Te-establishment of the Jewish 
reiabilitation| Populations is more hopeful. The 
vast majority of the Jewish dis- 
[placed persons and migrants, how- 
lever, believe that the on'y place 
|which offers a protpect ia Pales- 
(7) We saw many conditions in| tine. 
m the centers that might be criti-; (13) Whatever the previous posi- 
cized, owing te circumstances) tion in life of those in the centers, 
which were not always within the|from a judge in Merael to s young 


| 


' and educational life. 
furnishes 


larly in regard to problems con- 


'* Sewer of the military authorities|man who by reasons of years of 


' 


a 


* 2 improve. There were lack of| persecution has never been able to 
" gurniture, unsatisfactory cooking|earn his livelihood, there is the 


* prrangements, overcrowding and a| widespread feeling that they have 


‘! Bhortage of beds and bedding. We) been brought to the same level of 


°° pave no doubt that many of these|mere existence and homelessness. 


r 


“ 


"" @4 effort of our authorities to do|camps and slave labor, has 


* 
. 
8 
e 
. 


** 


:- 


* 


‘\ we feel that military authorities,| 


«» reason to be proud of what they) 


«» living still, as it seemed to them, 


* @onditions have been remedied and|The first sense of happiness, fol- 


” we saw evidence of the wholeheart-|lowing release from concentration 


* @verything possible toward the| Now they are conscious only of the 
@ell-being of these unfortunate a - — camp a even 

le. Nevertheless, at the best,| thoug under new and more 
. ont of the centers could not be/ favorable conditions. 

more than-the place in which the) (14) Work to therm is associated 

occupants were given shelter, food/with concentration camps and 
“and clothing. While everything|slave labor. Their aim then had 
" poasibig was being done for their|/been to do as little as they could 
~ pnysical needs, there was little that/to assist their persecutors, and 
- coujd be done to improve their|/now they are unwilling to e 
_ morale and relieve their mentaljin any activity which is not de- 
Coming from the horrors) signed to fit them for a new life in 
* of Nazi persecution, it was evident) Palestine, 

‘(at they still felt themselves out-| pve, though they heve spent a 
“pets and unwanted. considerable time in a center, they 
contrast With Germans Noted (still regard themselves as merely 

It is perhaps unfortunate in some) te ngeinn be ony time, Sy a. 
respects that nearly all of these). os oven re ewees in rie 
.,gettiements were in enemy terri- — ; proving 

, e conditions in which they are 
_tory. The displaced Jews see 
’ F living. Often their days are spent 
around them Germans living in aimless wandering around. On 
family life in their own homes and ng 
|the other hand, whe.ever facilities 

outwardly little affected by the war je 
are provided for pratical training 
while they, usually the last surviv- 

bore of their families, are for life in Palestine they eagerly 
ing members o a6, take advantage of tnem. 

(15) We were deeply impressed 
by the tragedy of the situation of 
these Jewish survivors in the cen- 
ters and by the tragedy of their 
purposeless existence. Man 
months have é ey 
were freed from Nazi oppression 
and brutality, but they themselves 
feel that they are as far as ever! 


under restrictions. 

(8) On the whole, having re- 
gard to the many problems with 
which they have had to contend, 


UNRRA and the various relief or-| 
ganizations concerned have every 


from going to Palestine. 


In the meantime, as time passes, | 
ers, huts, hotelr, apartment houses|of German frightfulness. We do|the new ties between those who are| 


sharing this common frustration 
become stronger and, obsessed b 


peoples of the world, their firm de- 
sire is to remain together in the 
future. It is this sense of cohesion, 
born of common suffering, which 
doubtless accounts for, if it does 
not wholly excuse, the firm resis- 
tance offered to proposals by com- 
petent bodies to remove young 
children to happier surroundings in 
other countries for careful rehabil- 
itation. Men and women are 
marrying in the centers in increas- 
ing number, and, together with 
other members of the center com- 
munities, they wait with growing 
impatience for the time when they 
can go to the only friendly place 
they know. 

(16) If, as we hope, our recom- 
mendation for the authorization of 
immigration certificates is ac- 
cepted, the t majority of the 
Jewish disp persons whose 
situation requires urgent action 
will be provided for and it will be 
possible to achieve the desirable 
end of closing the Jewish displaced 
persons centers and thereby dis- 
courage the further migration of 
Jews in Europe. Jews have wan- 
dered through Europe almost as 
they wish, from center to center, 
zone to zone, and country to coun- 
try. Such movements have added 
to the difficulty of tracing rela- 
tives, as has the practice, acquired 
by some during the war, of using 
various names. t 


Heavy Burden Seen 


They have also imposed a heavy 
burden on the authorities who have 
constantly had to improvise recep- 
tion arrangements. Stabilization 
will give sympathetic govern- 
ments a better opportunity of im- 
plementing national schemes of re- 
settlement and will encourage the 
Jews themselves to give more care- 


ful consideration to such opportu-) 


nities. Moreover, the resources of 
the Allied military authorities are 
limited and it is necessary that 
their commitments in connection 
with refugees be reduced, 

(17) ’e have also been asked 
to examine “the practical meas- 
ures taken or contemplated to be 
taken in those countries to enable 
them to live free from discrimina- 
tion and oppression.” The Govern- 
ments of the countries we visited 
expressed their opposition to anti- 
Semitism, but this is a poison 
which after vears of infection 
takes time to eradicate. We hope 
that their efforts will be success- 
ful. We would urge also that the 
United Nations ould exert all 
possible pressure in Germany and 
Austria to eliminate all trace of 
discrimination against Jews or re- 
sistance to their rehabilitation. 

(18) Further, a most important 
practical step that can be taken 
to assist the Jews in Europe who 
wish to remain is to secure the 


y 


their apparent rejection by other 


| 
| 


340, 500 
350,000 


ae NO 


RWAY 


2,000 
yooo 


— 
33.000) No 


: . 
%’ e 


Pee Pedy | ON 
a AE He Be* *t* > 
se rphy 


This map, based on statistical matter in Ap- 
pendix III to the report of the Anglo-American 


of the year, The aggregate of per-| 
sons in the ‘whole-time police and 
prisons service of Palestine in 1945) 
was about, 15,000, 

(4) The financial tables provid- 
ed additions! evidence of the ex- 


itent to which the energies and 


money of the Government are de- 
voted to the. protection of life and 
property. About £P.4,600,0001 
($18,400,000: was spent on “law 
and order” during the financial 
year 1944-45 as against {P.550,- 
000 ($2,200,000) in health and 
£P.7,000,000 ($2,800,000) on educa- 
tion. Thus é¢ven from a budgetary 
point of view Palestine has devel- 
oped into a ¢emi-military or police 
state. But, [mage a substantial 
change in the relations between 
the Governn‘ent and the Jews and 
the Arabs, the prospect of the kind 
of budget which characterizes a 


seo 


FRANCE 


320,000 
180,000 
25,000 
28,500 
fae: ; a 


et 


2 os 


60, 0 5 
ae ALY 


hg’ 


> 
» . 


| 


ministration, to assist and take 
part in the development of the 
country 

The Zionist Organization, 
long as its organization and con- 
stitution are in the opinion of the 
mandatory appropriate, shall be 
recognized as such agency, It 
shall take steps in consultation 
with His Britannic Majesty's 
Government to secure the coop- 
eration of all Jews who are will- 
ing to assist in the establishment 
of the Jewish national home.? 

(10) At first the agency gave 
the Palestine Government effec- 
tive cooperation. With its large 
revenue, its able administrators, 
advisers and staff, and its mani- 
fold activities, the agency. became 
finally and still remains the most 

tent nengovernmental authority 
mn Palestine and indeed in the 
Middle East. The Peel Commission 


“ SOVIET UNION 
0, 0006 


May 1, 1946 


Committee of Inquiry, shows the number of Jews) Jewish migration, extended his cal-| 
in each country of Ekrope in 1939 and in 1946. 


(7 


sessions, by Arabs and officials of 
the Palestine Government as well 


as by. Agudath Israe! and some | 
#0 |individual Jews, The Agency's cus-| 


tomary functions, which are cen- 
tered On the establishment, main- 
tenande and growth of a national 
home “or the Jews, were not con- 
demnei, Thac is easily explainable, 
for it’ bas been one of the most 
succes$ful colonizing instruments 
in history, 

Bvi; the present relations be- 
tween the Government and the 
Jewisi- Agency must be corrected 
if the ‘yeneral welfare is to be pro- 
moted’ and the cause of peace in 
that ctucial area of the world is to 
be pfotected. Uniess this is 
achiev sd, Palestine might well be 
plunged into a civil war, involving 
| the whole Middle East, 

(13) Neither Jews nor Arabs 


settled, civilized, non-garrisoned| described it as “a Government ex-|\"@Ve Neen included in the highest 


and prosper?us community is dark. 

(5) Arab political leadership is 
still in the hands of the small num- 
ber of families which were promi- 


isting side by side with the man- 
datory Government.” The descrip- 
tion is even more accurate today. 


Agency's Role Cited 


“llation; others are about to do 80lized in 193%. 


speedy restitution of their prop-inent im Ottdéman times, of which 
erty. We realize that there @reithe most nbtable are the Hus-| ‘The agency is now generally be- 
difficulties, but none the less we do|seinis. This family controls the/lieved to have unofficial, but none 
not think that all that is possible|mogt important of the Arab politi-ithe less powerful, influence over 
is being done. Some Governments)|ca] parties, the Palestine Arab|Hagana—-the so-called Jewish 
have passed the necessary legis-|party, which was formally organ-|Army—the strength of which is 
The objectives of estimated as over 60,000, The Jews 
or have just done so. Many months)this and of, all Arab parties in| credit the agency with most of the 
have passed since the war has)palestine aré the immediate stop-|improvements in Palestine since 
ended and from our inquiries it)page of Jewish immigration, the|the first World War. Unquestion- 
appears that only a few Jews have! immediate prohibition of the sale|ably it has been a tremendous 


Yiemigrate is the feeling 


yet recovered what is properly) of land to Jews, and the concession| power for good and has been in-| 


theirs. 

Property Award Suggested 

Further, we think that the Gov- 
ernments of the countries where 
the Jews were persecuted snould 
themselves provide assistance in the 
re-establishment of those Jews 
who seek to remain. This assist- 
ance might take the form of pro- 
viding property in lieu of restitu- 
tion. 

(19) Taking into account the 
possibility that an improvement in 
the economic and political condi- 
tions in Europe may affect the at- 
titudes of those who now see no 
hope of re-establishing themselves 
in their countries, we estimate 
that as many as 500,000 may wish 
or be im to emigrate from 
Europe. 

As described by many witnesses, 
a factor which has greatly in- 
creased the urgent, indeed frantic, 
desire of the Jews of Europe to 
that all 
doors have been shut to them and 
that there is no exit. 

We feel that our recommenda- 
tions both in’ regard to the au- 


of independence to .a state in 
which the Arab majority would be 
dominant. 

(6) There has been no evidence 
that the Arab notables who ap- 
peared before the Committee, and 
whom the Committee visited in 
several countries, did not reflect 
accurately the views of their fol- 
lowers. The Arabic press, for ex- 
ample, protests as vehemently as 
Arab spokesinen against a Jewish 
influx of any kind, even if the cer- 
tificates for admission were con- 
fined to old men and women and 
o children rescued from German 
ceath camps. 

In short, absolute, unqualified 
refusal of the Arabs to acquiesce 
in the admission of a single Jew to 
Palestine is ‘the outstanding fea- 
ture of Aral politics today; and 
the newly formed parties of the 
Left, based on the embryonic trade 
union movement, display as in- 
transigent a nationalism as the old 
leaders. 





(7) An additional reason for 
the insisten:@ of the Palestinian 
Arabs on in.inediate independence) 


dispensable to their protection and 
progress. 

(11) But the agency has be- 
come so powerful and its prestige 
han been so far enhanced by its 
accomplizhments, that its firm re- 
fusal to cooperate in carrying out 
the White Paper has caused the 
Government now to regard it as a 
distinctly dangerous influence. 
Viewed from the standpoint of the 
Pa.estine Government, it appears 
as a forces for disunity, partly for 
reasons outside the Agency's con- 
trol, partly by reason of its own 
activities, It has been a party to 
activities calculated to lead 
estrangement Between the Yishuv 
on the one hand and the Palestine 
Government and the mandatory on 
the other, and to the consolidation 
of active resistance by the Yishuv 
to the Governments’ avthority. 
These activities have undermined 


ithe authority of the administration. 


(12) Many criticisms of the Jew- 
lah Agency have been made before 


ithe committee, in open and closed 


-- 


"Tie Jewish Agency for Palestine was 
nized in 190% im liew of the Zionist Organiza- 


jranks »f the administration. Brit- 
ish officials hold all the important 
positions. They exercise as much 
authority as in a country where 
the mrss of the inhabitants are in 
a primitive stage of civilization. 
District and local officials, Arab 
and Jew alike, bear only limited 
discretion and responsibility, even 
in their own communities. The 
Palest/ne administration is blamed 
by Arfbs and Jews alike for this 
situatifn. 

(14); In consequence of these 
iconditinpns, the Holy Land\ is! 
scarre¢ by shocking incongruities. | 
Army ‘ents, tanks, a grim fort and 
barracks overlook the waters of 
the Sea of Galilee. Blockhouses, 
road biirriers manned by soldiers, 
barbed: wire entanglements, tanks 
in the street, per-emptory searches 
seizures and arrests on suspicion, 
Dematige by gangsters and shots 
in the! night are now character- 
istic. 4 curfew is enforced, and 
the press of Palestine is subject to 
censor#hip, 

Palestine has become a gar- 
risoneé but restive land, and there 
is little probability that the tran- 
quillity; Gear to people of good-will, 
Jews, Moslems and Christians 





to! alike, vill be restored until vast- 


ily bettir relations are established 
among the principal «elements of the 
community, including the admin- 
istratidn. With that assured, the 
varioux groups could be united on 
the bexis of those fundamentals 
oe 4re common tc civilized peo- 
ple who wish to live their own 
|lives, sindeterred and unterrified 
\by the’ possibility that first one 
faction’ and then another will rise 
in operi or covert rebellion against 


(4) According to officia! esti-|\dustry, though wartime difficul- 
/mates, the population of Palestine|ties have called for special meas- 
| grew from 750,000 at the census of/ures of Government assistance, 
1922 to 1,765,000 at the end of/which in turn have tended to bring 
11944. In this period the Jewish|the two together in cooperative 
part of the population rose from| Protective measures. 
| $4,000 to 554,000, and from 13 to} (1!) Everywhere is to be seen 
31 per cent of the whole. Three-|a marked disparity between the 
|fourths of this expansion of the standards of living, however meas- 
|Jewish community was accounted ured, of the Arab aad Jewish com- 
for by immigration. Meanwhile the munities. Jewish wage rates are 
Arabs, though their proportion of|consistently higher than Arab, 
|the total population was falling,|those for unskilled labor being 
|had increased by an even greater|™ore than twice as high. There is 
|number—the Moslems alone from/omly a limited range of competi- 
| 589,000 to 1,061,000'. Of this Mos-|tion between them, and therefore 
lem growth by 472,000, only 19,000/ minimum of natural pressure 
was accounted for by immigration. |toward equalization. Habits of 
The expansion of the Arab com-|COnsumption, the Gegree of reli- 
munity by natural increase has|*"ce on the market, whether for 
| been in fact one of the most strik-/*"PPlies or income, housing stand- 
‘ing features of Palestine’s social **4s and so forth, differ widely, 
history under the mandate. ara Fong yo — on ee 
/avaliadle to e rad are extrerme- 
(5) The present density of POP"\iy limited. The war has dope lit- 
ulation in Palestine is officially €S-ltle, if anything, to weaken the 
timated at 179 per square mile. If division y &. 
_ largely desert subdistrict of 7 
rsheba is excluded from the cal-| W 
ieltion, tis dames io tan Wartime Economie 
(6) The committee obtained es-| Developments 
timates of the probable future| (12) In recent years the war 
growth of Palestine’s population|and changes due to the war have 
from Professor Notestein, Director | been the main influences govern- 
of the Office of, Population Re-|ing the slandard of tiving and eco- 
search at Princeton University,/nomic prosperity of both sectors. 
‘from Dr. D. @. Glass, Research Though the margin between Jew- 
|Secretary of the Population In-|ish and Arab wage rates under- 
| vestigation Committee in London,| went in general little change, the 
and in Palestine from the Com-|incidence of taxation and ration- 
missioner for Migration and Sta- ing, together with subsidies in aid 
tistics and the Government Stat- of the cost of living, tended to de- 
istician. The estimates for the|press the higher Jewish stande.rd 
| non-Jewish population made by the)of living more than the Arab. 
| last-named, on various hypotheses} Another result of the war was 
but with the constant assumption|that the Jewish sector of the econ- 
that there would be no non-Jewish\omy became increasingly urban 
immigration or emigration, ranged|and industrial, while the Arab ssc- 
from 1,652,000 to 1,767,000 at the|tor, notwithstanding the fuller 
end of 1959. Professor Notestein,|utilization of its limited industrial 
also assuming the absence of non-|capacity, remained overwhelmingly 
agricultural. In both sectors the 
culations to 1970 and arrived at alGovernment took an increasingly 
figure of 1,876,000. The Commis-jactive part in determining the 
sioner for Migration predicted an|shape and direction of economic 
Arab population of 1,565,000 in/effort. 
1960 and 1,820,000 in 1970. The| (13) The closing of the Me4i- 
highest estimates were those of Dr.|terranean to Allied shipping cut 
lass, who anticipated a settled) Palestine off from the chief mar- 
Moslem population (i.e., excluding| ket for her citrus fruits and the 
the Christian Arabs) of 1,636,000, chief source of her imported sup- 
in 1961 and 2,204,000 in 1971. For| plies. The spread of the war zone 
the probable Jewish population at|to the Middle East converted Pal- 
the end of 1959, on the supposition! estine into a base as well as an 
that no immigration occurred in| arsenal. Large numbers of troops 
the interval, the Government Sta-|had to be quartered there. Sup- 
tistician put forward the figure of| plies of food and other necessities 
,000. of life and of war materials had to 
(7) The Jewish community, tn\be provided locally or imported 
the absence of immigration would| Where oossible from neighboring 
form a steadily diminishing pro- Middle East countries, themselves 
portion of the total population. subjected by the same combina- 
This is clear from the comparative| ion of causes to severe economic 
rates of natural increase, shown in| Pressure. Mxisting industries were, 
the table below: jas far and as fast as possible, re- 
. |directed into war production. 
See ae OReaae ae On, NATURAL | Established undertakings were en- 
Jews Christians larged and new ones were set up, 
; 2016 | with Government support, in order 
|to contribute to the needs of the 
military campaign and build up a 
jhigher degree of self-sufficiency. 
In this development the variety of 
manufactures was broadened to in- 
clude a number of more compli- 
icated nechanical and chemical 





| 


Yea 
1922- 
1926- 
1931-35 20.9} 
1936-40 i7.18 : 
1941-44 i783 8.88 
The high Arab rate of natura! 
increase is accounted for by a fer-| 
tility which is among the highest 
recorded in the world, and by the 
disappearance under the mandate 
of such counter-balancing factors)” gpa 
as conscription for the Ottoman|, ‘!4) Thus Palestine became an 
army and a high incidence of ma-|'™portant source of supply of man- 


laria. The fact that the rate is stil!|“{*ctured gocds not only for mil- 
rising seems to be due principally !t#ry purposes throughout the area 


|but for civilian needs in surround- 
to decli - 
infant a particularly ing countries, The skill and inven- 


P jtiveness of the Jewish immigrants 
Economic Contrasts lof pre-war years proved an invalu- 
(8) On the economic side Pales- 2>le asset, and the directed effort 
tine is a country of marked con-|W85 ‘supported by the Jewish 
trasts. While the Arabs have 4s¢ncy and the other established 
remained preponderantly rural, in|°TS4"s of Jewish settlement. Not- 
the Jewish sector, along with the|W!thstanding the necessity of max- 
“close settlement on the land’|'™uUm food supply, the Jewish 
which had been laid down as a ®COmomy became still more concen- 
guiding principle of Jewish colon- ‘T4ted upon industrial activity, and 
ization, there has been, particu- “close settlement upon the land” 
‘larly in later years, a remarkable “®* forced further into the back- 
industrial development. Moreover, $70Und as the ruling principle of 
the new Jewish colonization has °*P&™sion 
jassumed more and more the char-| (15) The war had yet another 
acter of a socialist experiment. 'distorting effect, which sprang 
For though at many points it re- from financial transactions. Vast 
|tains, particularly in urban indus- Military expenditure in Palestine 
try and trade, the form of private|for both goods and civilian serv- 
enterprise, it is everywhere guided ices, along with shortage of ship- 
and supported—in finance, techni- ping and potential inward cargoes, 
ical advice and other matters—by)|>rought about a stringency in sup- 
the great complex of Jewish under- Plies and in labor. This resulted in 
takings which cooperate in the/ "ising prices, rising wage rates and 
building of the national home. — —— ges rising ——_ 
«(9) The passage of years has '@"&* pro its and a rapid growth 
only sharpened the ee in|Of Money-wealth (including bank 
structure between the two econo- “¢Posits and hoarded currency), 
‘mies. On the Arab side, notwith- #red by both the Jews and 
standing some development in co- Arabs 
‘operation and trade unionism, Taxation was increased; but tax- 
individualiem is still characteristic, “tion and voluntary saving went 


“4 
22.70 








only a small part of the way in 


I ri . 
one anbther, or against the Gov-|/" agriculture small-scale peasant draining off the flow of unspend- 


tien as the appropriate Jewish agency under 
the terms of the ma t 


. 


~V 


' every hilleide that is not adequate-|dependént State of Trans-Jordan ‘sf ' >alestine. it 
fellowes aee the Agency S8\1y protected by terracing or forest|and their outlets to the Mediter-|‘rom an Arab grower, But — ret Ape yee ger 
An appropriate Jewish enc cover, and constant warfare has to/ranean;,and it has great potential a country being so sharply divided|¢ven the more transitory results 
pprop arency | be carried’ on against erosicn. importsnce in the air traffic of the . oe ommen ah Sonaen ie alleen 

shall be recegnized as a public ; future. : in its economic, let alone social|O' W&? pressures Upon the econ 
body for the purpose of advising | (a) pa eon Jews of Pales- Palestine PA ee aeenty tavetved and political, basis jmy had passed away The pattern 
and cooperating with the admin. (tine and almost alf the Arabs live). An . | Only in citricultute, which before|Of the post-war economy ia still 
istration of Fialestine in such eco- in the plains, though these contain)!" te pusiness and politica of theling war provided the steple export | Undetermined and this without 
nomic social and other matters less than one-seventh of the total international trade in oil; for, al-|oe Palestine, do we find close asso for the omnipresent un 
as may affect the establishment area of Palestine, while the moun- hough there are no wells in the ciation between the two sectors. It certainty concerning the political 
of the Jewist national home and (tains and ‘the southern deserta are Country: a pipe-line delivers a is shared about equally between future of the country Even be 
the interests of the Jewish popu- ‘populated, apart from scattered stream of crude oil to the great re-| fore the war ended war orders had 
lation in Palestine, and, subject Jewish colonies, exclusively by fineries: at Haifa; and from there 11t ts diffiewlt to estimate the Ared popu-|fallen off somewhat: but the con- 
always to the control of the ad- | arabs. tankers. deliver it to COUNtTICR me Ett eis basis and a “man tinued shortage of imported sup- 
Both Arab and Jew put forward around .and beyond the Mediterra-!propertion of the Christian population ts nat! 
leating pound is equivalent to & pOUM4 historical and cultural claims to nean. The American concession in (i84 .45 dy (4 of tet the Christians num 


allowing 


« —_--—— — 


have done to succor these rem-| 

nants of Nazi persecution. In par- ae gpa. ony ~ ge as life. thorization of certificates for ad- ~ = — i Oe eee ernment itself. —— apy ta _ able incomes. Rationing, so far as 

‘ticular we would like to pay our| e consider thaf these men,| mission to Palestine, and in regard Th aaa . P Seats ieee A dominent: end sg - ‘ PFe~| it was applied, failed to check with 
. tribute to the men and women who| Women and children have a moral|to the relaxation of immigration eines ve A he 5 titted ¢ nif CHAPTER iV viathtie ef entarunt ~y | — ~ sufficient promptitude the effects 

are working, so often in such de-/ce mon the civilized world. Their|iaws generally as an emergency)‘ emse aoe a nays ; irhbe m ; : ag saaeate ore -~\——-"~ of competitive buying. Subsidies in 

.. pressing circumstances, to allevi-|P r e condition has evoked ajand humanitarian measure, will aie ond rs oe bs 4 etal ~ Geography and Economica aemee neiiheun orp Petes  bnatvid . aid of the cost of living were only 

. ate the sufferings of these unter aethy has ay ey aya > ame aot only bring succor to those to es ye Steyn ae the — Geography the Whale of Satectinn. ent. qnmsiiee on Soe. Sauntetn > Preemie yen successful in keeping a few bare 

eater a oe print of a report|Only of providing them with the cae tn ahah sities aateee _ ond World War, and fh, Trans-| mie iia al ot the great deserts to the south, al-|the other hand, is to be found ——_— sae the range of the 

eee ible accurately to por-/bare essentials of food, clothing] feelings of urgency with which the|J°rdan, which has since become an) 2) Palestine, : - y ad be a |most r&iniess and with more rock|nexus of centralized control, Thus|P°°OTe** Peoples resources. 

— feeli with regard to/and shelter, It seems to them that|Jews look beyond Euro Th lindependent state. The formation, W%'es or the State of Vermont, i®\than soil, are not uncontested.|the Jewish agency, besides being) By allocating raw materials and 
on’ enetentnar ectiberate? ; a ticted (the only real chance of rebuilding} will be pon soar de ph to re-|t the Arat League has given geographically hem ay Part of! With a, small, serni-nomadic or no-|@ landowner on a large scale, is a/by close costing of industrial proc- 
by the + as on ~ ae yee who their shattered lives and of becom-| settle themselves in Europe, if that Arab leaders in Palestine a great-|"¥™'® nto . — a ai /madic Arab population, their emp-|promoter and financier of agricul-\°8%¢8, the Government kept a 

~fell into their hands, The visit of ing normal men and women again|is possible, or wait patiently in|@? confidence, They feel that the/on the north. A marked natural/tiness appears to the Jews as ajtural settlement, and has large and Drake on the rise in prices of a 

our subcommittee to the ghetto in !# that offered by the Jewish peo-|their respective countries until/®“PPort of the whole Arab world | division aie eaten tan rastal challenge to their powers of colon-|varied participations in industrial Wide range of military stores and 

of Warsaw has left on their minds an ple in Palestine. their time has come to leave lfor their caus» has now been mobi-| rates the rich soil of ig fee al | ization! and, despite the unpromis- and other enterprises. Histadruth, essential civilian goods. But in 
impression which will forever re-| ; lized. Furthermore, the presence|Strip and the plain of i raelon | ing ouljook on any economic test,|which is closely associated with the Senere! the inflationary trend was 
“a Areas of that city bn which! CHAPTER III in the United Nations of five Arab froin the a mountain > ae the Avabs regard proposals for|agency, is by no means simply a “strained only to an extent that 
formérly stood large buildings are| ° - states, one of which is a member | parched for a large arte S 4 *| Jewish ‘ settlement as yet further|federation of workers’ unions, It ™acde Palestine’s experience less 
‘now a mass of brick rubble, cover- The Political Situation in Palestine* - a Seourity Counetl, oy Nny and from the southern ** |evidencas of the well-planned is, in addition, a vast consu ners’ | Alarming than that of surrounding 
’ s : : vat the Arab case will not go by . “creepihg conquest.” \cooperative organization; it oper- o 

s Lag Sang 4 an Raney cage: Sw (1) Ragaadl a ye pe em oe the other, has widened stil! fur-| default when the issue of Palestine| 1" the wide coastal plain there a Genavsehe, “indeok partly ex-|ates large contributory social serv-| (16) Ags to external finances, 

Steere oi stands On . oscnchealtie ennete “Neithe yee ey aon ther. is brought before the United Na-|thriving towns—Acre, Hata, Tel-| piaing the intransigent claintw of|ices, including unemployment in-|whereas Palestine had been hither- 

™* used 1 for killing Jews. has a sen se of rie i coe me yd wide. seems at all dis-| tions. Aviv, Jaffa and Gaza—with ports)hoth sides to the whole country.|surance, and it has latterly become|to nominally a debtor country— 

Vi eh P his th 1 1 +h [2 "Th va niet : at ho 5 & to make any White ition Noted and a variety of industries. Here,| mm. plding are too amall and the|® capitalist employer, being the|“nominally” in the sease that her 
ewing A. in the cold gray |& * 8 aes e@ con’ S\sincere effort to reconcile either Paper Opposi moreover, is to be found intensive) ountsins too poor to subsist as|sole or controlling owner of a wide|debtorship on capital account did 

a of A prem wf ~ one could » es po — Poca may Any seo’ their or their funda-| (g) Just as the Arab political cultivation, by Arab and Jew alike, | indeperident economies. and ever-increasing range of in-|not entail the normal current re- 
magine pths of human suf- - — _ — ion to xe Jews\mental differences, The Arabs es are unalterably oppesed to with attention concentrated on the (3) The significence of Pales-|4ustrial, constructional, financial|/mittances on account of interest 

~~fering there endured. In the court- Ag rab minds The | view the mandatory Government] Jewish immixration, the various|°!4 8nd profitable pursuit of citrus|,) 2 1, ‘international affairs apart|@nd service undertakings. Therejand amortization — the war 

yards of the barracks were pits —_ co ndeed, a — about with misgivings and anger. It is| Jewish parties, even though some growing. from *%s possible strategic im-|have occurred lately several in-|changed her status to that of a 

svcontaining human ash and human/tie ure as about present. ‘not only condemned yerbally, but! criticize the idea of a Jewish state, The mountains contain not only} ’ istances of members of Histadruth, |creditor. The bulk of her over- 

+ bones. The effect of that place on|Every intelligent Areb and Jew is 1 ba k and|Portance, derives largely from the ev ' 

hy reac P goseed te aak attacked with bombs and firearms|are all united: in their advocacy of | @esvlate areas of barren rock and)’. ) ii) it ties across natural/®* ® trade union, striking in a wage seas assets, however, being con- 

= Jews who came searching, so tne“ i question, “Who by organized bands of Jewish ter-| unlimited immigration, of the deforested hillside, but also fertile}. ies af canemmaahdeiiien Major |“ispute against Histadruth as fined within the sterling area, can- 

* “in vain, for any trace of their dear am . aniaiaen — te pa jrorists. abolition of restrictions on tne sale|V@leys and basins where cereals veilway, ond wend ecmamunications|°*™* of the employing business, not be converted into goods until 

——— can be left to the imagina- Mab powered a "that the| The -Palestine Administration|of land and of the abrogation of/#Te grown; in addition ee pads through the country. It is on| . (10) Not to overemphasize the/Great Britain is once more able 

When we remember that etidituation, bad as it now. ia, will appears to be powerless to keep; the 1939 White Paper. at we ue! ——. nt athe rovte between two great cen-|“leavage, it should be noted that to resume a full flow of exports 
Maidanek and Osweicim and many &TOW worse. The conflict will 5° by ios dinglar ond sue se poe the ag Be Set yy fruit trees on tiny terraced atrips|ters of Arab culture, Cairo and De-line Arab ae <= tna rede pauen a oar uae } ol 
other centers a deliberate policy of/0", the gulf between Arabs and large forces. Even if the total authority of .the Jewish Agency, onatructed and maintained with|™Mascus, between Egypt, the ad-/(ne Arad and Jewish economies, as) i, 

el Some ” " . which is recognized by Great Brit- jin the Palestine Potash Works. |"*?'e® 

Seine tering war iniceguded with netfee fo “nnaleran gt Eat catenin, cro teh tran of tel EP ie arty Tn winter Caun tnd other member vinta ere nerd some nied Ine. Pot. War Prompect 

. : . mandate, as nstrument o : 4 : ndence, where, for example, the ’ 
mares Se coer <6, Weein 3 ip -aaie ona ed in a thrice hallowed reputed to be, the tical impli-| Jews throughout the world. Arti-|2¢®”y rains tear away soil from and between Iraq and the newly in- Jewish housewife buys mem met (17) At the time of the commit- 

eomated that certainly not less than . cations would still deeply dis- 

*'5,000,000 perished, we can welll (2) It is nine years since the turbing. It. reflects the honest fear 

‘wunderstand and sympathize with|Peel Commission ma‘e its report.|of experienced officials that to- 

«the intense desire of the surviving|The recommendations were unful-|morrow may produce circum- 

Jews to depart from localities so/filled, but the analysis of political!stances in which military opera- 

esfull of such poignant memories, It|Conditions remains valid and im-'tions will be necessary. 

‘must also be understcod that this Pressive, The gulf between the ; 

“happened in what were regarded Ar@bs of Palestine end the Arab Size of Police Force Cited 

“as civilized communities world on the one side, and the (3) Official data imply the 

(10) There can scarcely be a J¢WS of Palestine and elsewhere gravity of the menacing problem. | 

‘Jew in Europe who has not suf-| “During our visit to Paletine and in th They show that, apart from those 

cefered in Rreater or less degree preparation of tnia report, we were greatly convicted of terrorist activity, the 
either himself or herself or by the |Prictine which the Government comeied {number of Jews held on suspicion 
sJoss of relatives. Many non-Jews short ratice for our use, ang which containjaveraged 450 during most of the 
of all nationalities also suffered|fatstion  % ™" “*tstee! and other in- year 1945 and was 554 at the end|yia..r 


Continued on Following Page 





be 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY I, 1946: Cc i7 
nt nt lt Et 


—_-— --— 
aaa 


Recent History of Jewish-Arab Relations Summarized in Statement Issued by Inquiry Committee 


CO 


| 

Continued From Preceding Page |°f Palestine’x economy has en-jin consilerable detail by Americanjargue,' yielded to force, cut dorwn|the Palestine Home Guard. They|»ossible for the son of an Arabjunderstand and which do not'the Jewish community in Palestine 
“as - gaged a great deal of attention on|engineers of the highest standing,|immig*ation, and thus caused the|were with Britain in the fight/fellah to rise to a position of|)understand them. has never, as a community, faced 

plies has afforded a natural pro-jthe part of non-official bodies.|for a “Jordan Valley Authority.” |death of thousands of Jews in Hit-jagainst Fascism: they were/svealth and political influence. (12) The pericd since the first|the problem of cooperation with 
tection to industry in shifting the}/Some witnesses have been severely|The general design is to bringiler’s gas chambers. The Arabs,/against Britain in the struggle) Arab agriculture in Palestine is|Worlc War has reen marked by athe Arabs. It is, for instence, sig- 
flow of its products into the civil- critical of the administration for|water from the sources of the Jor-|who had recourse to violence, re-jagntinst the White Paper, ch |‘ raditi and improvement is|rising wave of rationalism in all/nificant that, in the Jewish Agen- 
ian market. The Arab boycott of|lack of visior and unreadiness to/dan to the fertile Zsdraelon andjceived substantial concessions, |they now felt was not cnly unjust/+}ampered by an antiquated system|Arab countries. »’alestinian Arabs cy’s proposal for a Jewish State, 
Palestine Jewish products had had,/give positive support to proposals|coastal wens to irrigate the lower| while the Jews, whb had put their/but totally inhuman as preventing|\¢ land tenure. The Arab adheres |share this sentiment, and they are the problem of handling 4 millica 
alley, and to ‘utilize the/faith i the mandatory, were com-|the escape to Palestine of men,/io @ strict social code far removed|strongly supported in their demand and a quarter Arabs is dealt with 


when the committee was in the|for expansion. Others have ex-| Jordan : 
country, little effect thus far on|pressed the view that monetary|waters both of the Jordan River |pelled ‘to accept what they regard/women and children in imminent|?rom the customs of the modernfor independence and self-govern-'in the vaguest of ti 
the genera) economic situation. No|independeace would clear the way|and of the Mediterranean Sea for|as a violation of the spirit and the/danger of death in Nazi Germany |-vorid, and he is shocked by innova-|ment by all the States of the Arab) (6) We noted, eve*, a few 


obvious unemployment had ap- to more vigorous public and pri-|the generation of electric power. letter of the mandate. and Nazi-controiled Europe. ‘ions of manners which|League. No othe subject has oc-' hopeful signs. Reference was made 
peared, but some concealed unem-|vate enterprise. Opinion has been| It is claimed for the scheme; (9) An immediate result of the) Outrage Felt, Investigators Say | seem to the|cupied so much of the attention of above to the proposals fr agers 
ployment was said to exist, and/@lmost unanigjous as to the cramp-|that, whether carried to full com-|/success of Arab terrorism was the When the war ended and the ght|the Arab League or has done so tion with the Arabs ma y Hash- 
earnings of factory labor had/ing effects of Article 18 of the/pletion or adopted in part—it is|beginning of Jewish terrorism and, Labor Gov t ca to power much to unite its membership asiomer Hatzair and by 
peoteliy diminished. The cost of|Mandate, which restricts the exer-|subdivided into stages each stand-|¢ven nsore significant, a cloning of the White still ined in has the question #f Palestine. |group. The committee observed 
iving and wage rates remain ob-/cise of tariff-making and ain-\ing on its own merits—it would|the ranks, a tightening of the dis- force. The ye yeh had expected (13) Those mernabers of the com-'with pleasure the Arab-J¢wish co- 
stinately high. jing powers in the interests of the|/bring a bountiful supply of water|cipline and militarization on immediate fulfillment by a mittee who traveled in the neigh- opera achiaved on the munici- 
(18) House building is slowly|™andated territory. at an economic cost to areas Of Jevrish Sines Gevetiaeel ef thd Leber conceives it vio-|boring Arab countries found that/pal commission which 
getting under way after the long| Conflicting views are held on the|of fertile land now yielding only|@gency in which |hostility to Zioniym was as strong | aifa, and in the citrus control 
interval — resulting in shocking question whether the citrus indus-|one crop a year. Very large sums|quarte’s of a citizen army which outrage|*2# and widespread tere as in ne marketing boards, as well as 
congestion—which began with the|try will be able to regain, or even|of money would be required, but/felt that at any moment it might| nen no change of policy occurred. itself, They received from the joint union activity be- 
disturbances of 1936-39 and con-|possibly to expand, its pre-war|these, the committee were in-/have to fight for its very existence. 7. bit arnegs dot oe a néw peak of HRH the Regent jof Iraq a copy of |tween Jew and Arab in the Pai- 
tinued throughout the war, when|markets. Some see Palestine's fu- be available from|Deprived, as he believed, both of) (» intensity, and the position of She power a letter in which he had told Presi-jestine Potash Company ard on the 
all constructional activity was con-|ture in the establishment of thejexternal sources. his natural and of his legal rights, soderates became almost im- on,|dent Roosevelt tlat “all the Arabjrailways. But such examples of 
centrated upon military works. coastal fringe as the industrial! (25) Such bold long-term plan-|the Palestinian Jew vegan to lose Agency) "he infl countries will unite against /cooperation are rare in P: 
There is, however, some natural’ workshop of the Middle East; some|ting presupposes willing coopere-|faith in the Mandatory Power. The ent|“ny danger that the Arabs of Pal-|and they are far outwe'ghed im 
hesitation in undertaking @ large|stress the need of an expansion|tion, or at least interested neu-|dangerous belicf was that) nat. after V-E Day, it was quite :0r agriculture and industry excite estine may have to meet. |Arab eyes by the exclusiveness of 
building program while costs re- nicely balanced between agricul-|trality, between all sections of the|/not patience but violence was futile for it to attempt to cooper-|in the minds of the Arabs a sense Moreover, the ‘jovernments and the General Federation of Jewish 
main so high. jture and industry. pulation and the Government.|needed to achieve ‘ustice. of inferiority and the feeling that|PeoPles of the neighboring States Labor in its trade union piilicy and 
f +4 ; Th ti f th ode ate with the mandatory in sup- 4 \Bolteve that a Zionist State in Pal-'of the Jewish A fh its labo 
Quite apart from the value of; (23) Any forecast of Palestine’s| Moreover, it can have little or no @ position o e@ moderates ressing illegal activit they are contending against an im- - of the Jewish Agency ; al 
land. which h , bearing on the capacity of Pales-\who u‘ged self-restrsint and a re-|PTe8#'"s y: estine would be £ direct threat to|policy on land purchased for Jew- 
and, which has risen inordinately long-term prospects must, neces- ng pacity Britain’s pl (11) Any decision on the future/Ponderable force which is difficult them and would ‘impede their ef-lish sett] : 
in recent years, building materials sarily be viewed against the back- tine to provide an immediate|liance on a pledged word of Palestine will be futile and un-|'° ° forts t elener Arab unten.| ah settiement. 
are extremely expensive, while|ground of the country’s natural|/@ven of refuge for homeless Jews| Was pr vely undermined; the) reciistic unless it is made in full), This feeling is accentuated by|1" Prose yr Adin of Syria at the Lhe Jews and the 
timber, nearly all of which hasiresources. These are extremely|ffom Burope. ion of cognizance of the political tension|the fact that-they realize that the|- 3) 4) oN of the United| Administratio 
to be imported, is scarce. As &|limited, makirg Palestine peculiar-| 26) We have in this immediate & leaf from the Arab COPY! among the Jews in Palestine and|.‘ewish case is well understood and/00r' a the Committee in Lome ee eeration 
result of the shortage of skilled/ly dependent on foreign trade for|Context another-example of the/book, was progressively strength-|1). reasons for it. Both in evidence|‘vell portrayed in W 8ndicon that “Palestine in alien hands|..‘7) We were profoundly in 
artisans, sorhe building operatives|\raw materials and supplies of|™#nner in which Jewish zeal andjened. | given in public hearings, and in|london and that they V@ ROl ould be a wedge splitting th ¢ | Pressed the very varied experi- 
are earning up to £ P. 3 a day,/many finished goods. energy are ready -to outrun eco-| (10): Then came the war. Apart! numerous private conversations/ Means comparable in effectiveness Atab world ot ¢ most vital and) ments in settlement which we 
and, within recent times, have Ac-| Even the exploitation of the nat- nomic caution of the ordinary|from # small group of terrorists) with lead politicians and with|¢f stating their side of the contro- tive point.”; The same wit-| nspected, ranging from individu- 
crued additional benefits such 88| ura) asset comprised in a good soil Western pattern. Full ay weer the Jewish community Dh more| ordinary citizens, we were repeat-|Yersy to the Western world. They — "thle further fear of Mist Cooperatives to pure rollectiv- 
three weeks’ paid holiday and &lirradiated by long hours of bright|°", ¢ Week points in the Jewish/solid support than the Palestinian/ediy advised that the maintenance|have particularly resented the reso-|;.¢ ———, Zionist State #t Communities. Here, indeed, is a 
pension scheme. Building costs,/singhine is limited by the avail-/\CCOmomy and its immediate pros-|Arabs ‘to the British war effort./py the Mandatory of its present/lutions in favor of Zioniat aspira-|\ou14 inevitably. become expan-|™racie both of physical achieve- 
therefore, are found to be roughlY|ability of water. Despite an abun- pects does not in the least deter/But when the immediate Middle| policy could only lead to a state of|tions, adopted respectively by the sionist and aggressive, and would ment and of spiritual endeavor, 
£. P. 20 a cubic meter—far high-| dant winter rainfall in many parts, the insistence upon > Hastern danger was removed, the/ war, in which the extremists would|'Jnited States Congress and by the|:.nq to pe Pag tne eda with any| Wuich justifies the dreams of those 
er than in Great Britain. 'Palestine is en arid Provwe In home for the homeless. If thisjold struggle between the moder-|nave the passive support of almost British Labor party. _ which might, in the future \Jews and Gentiles who first con- 
(19) The situation is, indeed, re-|tne words of the Palestine Gov. should entail an all-round cut injates and the extremists began'the whole Jewish population and Although the Arab states have ee enti-A’ad policy ‘\ceived the idea of the National 
plete with elements of uncertain-|.-,ment. “the re are few countries standards of living of the presentiagain, heightened to an almost un-|the moderates would be swept diplomatic representation and five oe Middle Eset one a «4g | Home. 
ty. There is for one thing the | nowadays which can say thet Jewish population, so bc it. endurable tension by the news/from the key positions which they of them are members of the United), vita? region in whick all the great! Of Jewish industry in Palestine 
quest.on, debatable on pre-war ex- ‘their water rasources are of such There ig much to admire in this|from Europe and by such tragedies | still hold. To use the words of| Nations, the Arabs of Palestine feel were are interhated. A Zi onist|** is too early yet to speak with 
perience, how far the consolidation |ittie concern to thelr se that demonstration of brotherhood car-|as the Struma incident. jone Jewish leader: ‘nevertheless that they have not | here in Palesting could only exist | Confidence. ere ia boun‘flese op- 
and further growth of Jewish in-| egislation ropa ne Pweg omy ried, if need be, td the point of| During the war, tens of thou-| “Our present crisis in Europe succeeded in making their case| with the support of foreign powers, | mism and energy, great admir- 
dustry and trade are dependent | nnecessary’ ”. vet the Gov t sacrifice, But it is conceivable that|jsands of Jews learned to fight,/and Palestine is felt by all of us }.eard. The Western countries have This subd wot euly mean @ state| strative capacity, but a ; © 
upon oe ey te a Fane Laer mee 8 this, arid ohintey hon tag am oe expansion on oe See either in the British Army or in'to be our Dunkirk.” saany Jewish but few Arab citi-|o¢ Poem ver those foreign | °* skilled tay than wane b ~ 
am prev 7 cont | r | Bomme ° ture, upon a dubious sens and Arabs are less familiar) ‘Arab States, but) OTe Wantity ‘nan q —_ 
=x th ~ yng of conjec-|icitation of ita water, resources “ea, ood. o cae lopment ¢ oon CHAPTER VI with modern methods of propa: |aiso. the grave possibility. of ‘den-| (8) As pioneers in Palestine the 
nal - * hel z ink t es se land no authority even to ascertain | pp re ce ny ig edt enti , ganda. They feel that their case is|gerous alignments and manoeuvres 5... Raa os sanené of atten the 
peaceful conditions in the Middie(the extent of cuch water resources she patel al eeltiane gta pen Ae The Arab Attitude heing judged and their fate is being|which might end: in international| og) be proud. In Palestine there 
East, or a change in political stat- #5 ¢xist. thus returns to the need for sys-| (1) The committee heard a brief\secuted Jews of Europe, but they| ceciéed by mee aoe ee ene = — Highest level and\nas been no expulsion of the in- 
us, result in a large withdrawal; (24) The Commission on Pales-|tematic improvement of the coun-|presentation of the Arab case in|point out that they have not been ‘’®stern world which they do not possibly disaster.’ |digenous population, and axploita- 
of British forces, including police|tine Surveys, an American Zionist-|try’s basic resources, for which,| Washington, statements made in|responsible for this persecution and| ° . VII tion of cheap Arab labor has been 
and civilian residents, and a con-financed orgénization, submitted|as already indicated, orderly prog-|London by delegates from the/that it is not just that they should CHAPTER vigorously opposed as inconsistent 
uent reduction of incomes pro-|Proposals, conceived on bold and/ress in an atmosphere of peaceful/Arab states to the United Nations,|be compelled to atone for the sins | YE’. 2.48 in P P with Zionism. The failing of Pal- 
vided from abroad, though more|imaginative lines, and worked out collaboration is a sine qua non. |® sunee _eunbeemant Sveus the Sec-lof Western peoples by accepting Christian Interests in Palestine estinien Jewry is a different one. 
peaceful conditions would on the retary General and other repre-jinto their country hundreds of ; travel-| The Jews have always been in 
other hand induce a fuller flow of CHAPTER V sentatives of the Arab League in|thousands of victims of European me. Rant ee he ss Son te Vecern went ry pos 4|the biblical phrase a “peculiar peo- 
tourists. The Jewish Attitude — » and evidence given on be-janti-Semitism. Some Arabs evens) issues the committee  also|the representativas of the Jewish|Ple” which turned in on iself and 
of the Arab Higher Commit-|deciare that they might be willing ¢ suffered the consequences of its 
Costs Considered tee and the Arab Office in J . \heard representatives of Christian|and Moslem faiths would be of, 
(1) The committee’ heard the|Jerusalem a striking pamphlet in : an aad attion ro “ ittee to do their share in providing for! jnurches. The Arab Christians, di-\great importance: to international Peculiarity. In Palestins, under 
we Dah Daree: refugees on a quota basis if the)iieq among many denominations|understanding. ; bet fee a 


Arising again from wartime! tewish case, presented at full/support of bi-nationalism 
th is the question |‘ . . visited Baghdad, Riyadh, Dames-| 
growth of incustry eq length and with voluminous writ- ery close to Hashomer Hatzain, ya méS-'United States, the British Com- and numbering some 125,000,form! (3) The extent to which the holy | tional ae 


whether the high costa of produc- cus, Beirut and Amman, where monw , 
tion, and inferior quality of some/|ten evidence, in three series of pub- a _ ~~ — Reyes they were informed of the views rm ema PM cnaeth ng aay the overwhelming majority 0f|places, sacred to'Christians, Mos-\have not been able to throw 
permit the establishment of afirm! American Zionists, in London by/far greater than its numbers, | SPOkesmen. the view that th . cates ~ yh ‘thee Their delegation, led by thejoften not fully appreciated. It is sei¢-isniation. 
positon in the home market with-/')4 British Zionists, and finally|Taken altogether, these Palestinian| (2) Stripped to the bare essen-| Jews in agriculture a industr Greek Catholic Archbishop | oflimpossible to segregate the holy (9) We believe that this failure 
out inordinate protection, There! : critics of the Biltmore Program|tials, the Arab case is based upon had b ht } if indirect. be ¥\Galilee, declared their complete) places sacred to the three great/is in part at least, attributable to 
is the related question how far ex-|®"¢ most masrively by the Jewish certainly do not exceed at the mo-|the fact that Palestine is a coun-\rits tote } ra *, ‘ . sete . ehete solidarity with the Moslem Arabs religions into separate geographical the reiations between the Palestine 
ternal markets can be retdined— mv may in Jerusalem. The basic! nent one quarter of the Jewish try wh’ch the Arabs have occupied, standard ~‘ living. Though» very 1) the demand for an independent/ units, They are s:attered over the| administration and the Jewish 
even allowing for special advan-|policy advocated was always the), uistion in Palestine. But they for more than a thousand years, | 4 t of thant Ash ourchesc, “rab state. |\whole of Palestirte and not, a2 is community since 1930, which have 
tages in the new diamond-cutting | same? the so-called Biltmore Pro-| oo pesent @ constructive minority. |and a ‘lenial of the Jewish histor-| ote Yh 2 haces ean — ‘ah. The nor-Palestinian Christianjoften imagined, ‘confined to the! undoubtedly exaggerated the nat- 
‘ndustry and the fashion and wo-|gram of 1942, with the additional y Seal Gidtene te Walestina tm fennel reanen tenon, F mae ta 4. |aroups were unable to speak with| Jerusalem and Nazareth areas. ural Jewish tendency to exclusive- 
men’s specialty trades which to-|demand that 100,000 certificates Revisionist Stand Noted ing ths Balfour Declaration A memipen herr se str tne = ——e = & common voice, Indeed, Christians) (4) ‘The respdnsibility of the ness. Moreover, the Jews feel that 
gether are thought to have out-jfor immigration into Palestine) (5) On the other side stands the|,rans maintain, the British Gov- mek we . bie se ne, it re haveitave #0 completely failed to\christian world ioward Palestine they have enough to do defending 
standing prospects for yielding |should be issued immediately to re-|Revisionist party, numbering some|egnmert were giving away some-| avi oak ad teas eee teed Jews #chieve unity, or even harmony, in| was well expressed by General Al-| their own tion, without taking 
revenue from abroad—in the face/lieve the distress in Europe. 1 per cent of the Jawish commu- thing that did not belong to Brit-|neve >. “aie oh senke et “he | the practical tasks of administer- lenby in the Proclamation which on the Arab problem as will. 
of competition from advanced in-| This policy can be summed upjnity, and beyond it the various|si, and they have consistently|m ney to improve the cultivation '"8, the Christian holy places and| ne made on the o¢casion of the oc-| (10) A second factor af t 
dustrial countries and possible|in three, points: (i) That the man-|more extreme groups, which call argued that the mandate conflicted | thet aainin holdings "caring for the pilgrims who Visit cupation of Jerusalem on Decem- importance is the failure to i- 
continuation of the boycott of Jew- datory Isnould hand over control for active resistance to the White with the Covenant of the League|” r re & ngs. them that the keys of the Holy| per 1i. 1917: : op self-governing institutians. The 
ish products in neighboring Arab of immigration to the Jewish|/Paper and participate in and open- of Nations from which it derived) %¢ws’ Health Work Praised ‘Sepulcher are still entrusted to} Y ' ; | Jews, like the Arabs, are cormplete- 
states. |Agency; (ii) that it should abolish|ly support the present terrorist |it, authorit | Ae temsovement.ef heallh con-|seeeme | Furthermore, since your city \# liv deprived of all responsible par- 
Again, even though ree ge! nt restrictions on the sale of land,|campaign. The pine deny that the part/ditions waptene parts of the coun-, The lamentable fact that there is| ee Jakes af ths lanes ticipation in central government 
ditions might become fully adjust- and (iii) that it should proclaim) This wing of Palestinian Jewry| waved by the British in freeing try. while due in part to the activi- fo single spokesman in Palestine’ rejigions of mankind, and its soil | Meir democracy can oniy work 


ed to the inflated structure of/as its ultimate aim the establish-|derives its inspiration and its! 3 tor Christendom tends to obscure) within the Jewish communit d 
. | ’ lthem from the Turks gave Greatities of Government and in part to en o obscure; has been consecrated by the pray- aity, an 
prices and costs, the gross over-| ment of a Jewish State as soon as methods from the revolutionary |p vitain a right to gepene of their the efforts of the Arabs them- the legitimate Christian interest) ers and pilgrimages of multitudes to a limited degree in loca: affairs. 

in the Holy Land, which must be! of devout people of these three Thus, they haye not had the op- 
or 


valuation of the Palestinian pound|a Jewish majority has been|traditions of Poland and eastern 
1 selves, has undoubtedly been as-|': 

in relation to the pound sterling| achieved. Europe. Many of these extremists oii ee mee 4 gig reir by the work of cae Jewish *afeguarded in any solution of the| religions rhany centuries, portunity which self-government 

presents a further impediment to) It should be noted that the de-\are boys and girls under 20, of | Tur ” — accep ana nahh arate It is also argued that the rational problem. This interest de-| therefore do I ‘aake known to | brings, to learn the lesson of re- 

successful competition in export; mand for a Jewish State goes be- good education, filled with a po-| oA 1 b ti to the Jew | Jewish population has conferred mands not only freedom of access you that every Sacred building, sponsibility for the good of the 

markets and an added inducement|yond the obligations of either the|litical fanaticism as self-sacrific-|¢Ventus! subjection » “om substantial indirect benefits on the t> the holy places, but also that; ™onument, holy “pot, shrine, tra- whole state. They have been driv- 

to competitive imports. Balfour Declaration or the man-|ing as it is pernicious. They consider the mandate a vio-\il ibs through its contribution to|tranquillity should be achieved in a| ditional site, entiowment, pious ea back on thémselves. 

(20) It is sometimes claimed/date, and was expressly disowned) (6) The Biltmore program can|!Stion of their right of Gent-Geter~ ie ‘Dubls ~ - ‘country all of which, from the| De@uest, or custbmary place cf | This may th part explain the 
that the wage structure in Pales-|by the chairman of the Jewishionly te fully unders if it ig/Minaticn, since it is forcing upon |'ne public revenue. Guriation point ef view, | Holy| Prayer, of whatsoever form of (fact that at least one-third of the 
tine is far more elastic than else-| Agency as late as 1932. studied against this background of |“¢™ ®n immigration whi they| On the other hand, the Arena) | aad ™ ye & MIONY) the three religior's, will be mair- | jews who have settled in Palestine 
where, so that reductions in wage-| (2) In all the hearings, although| Palestinian life. Like al political do not desire and will not tolerate contend that such improvement as| ° tained and protected according to during the last ten years have 
costs and prices might proceed evidence was given by those sec-| platforms, it is ult of con-|~ 2" Mvasion of Palestine by the|there may have been in their stand-| | (2) The significance of Palestine; the existing customs and belief failed to apply: for Palestinian cit- 
smoothly and concurrently oncejtiong of the Zionist movement! fiicting politica! swanpunas an at.|Jews: jard of living is attributable solely since prehistoric times in the de-| of those to whos faiths they are inenship. yf nothing which _ 
the process had begun; but the war-|which are critical of the Biltmore|tempt by the leadership to main-| (3) ‘Che Arabs of Palestine point to an Oe pote pate Yas corr ml pA ry ne Ny sey _ eee ee a ; , saw in Palestine gave us any rea- 

y e ye been by| Program, most the wi that all the surreunding Arab ‘ : -| (5) e religiotia importance o ‘ 
timd@ wage increases have y eri of the witnessesitain unity without sacrificing Out c & ‘from the Administration. They as-|terests of archaeology and history Palestine to he ae ge ca = p Bares pt pe 


no means wholly in the form of|took the official Zionist line. The principle. The Jew who lives and #tates have now been granted in- mesa 
cost-Of-living bonuses—basic rises|Committee also heard the Jewish |rorks’ in the National Home is|depénd«nce. They argue that they Set that at least equal improve- te forgotten. The maintenance of|Christians alike niakes it ‘mproper| which they are undoubtedly fit, the 


: ts have occurred in other Arab conditions under which sucn studies to treat it either as an Arab state ne as 
have been widespread and substan- opponents of Zionism: first, the| dee ly aware both of his achieve-|@re just as advanced as are the Men . r AS & r Jews of Palestine would not mas- 
tial. The Committee could not but/small groups in America and| ments and of how much more could/Citizens of the near-by states, and countries, and that the action taken can be pursued is @ genuine con-|or as exclusively ‘esignated to the|ter the lessons of self-government. 


; by the Government to assist Jew-\cern of civilization. Moreover, an fulfill f Jewish national as- 
bserve thet at the time of its visit/ Britain who advocate assimilation have been achieved with whole-/they “demand independence for a ’ |fulfillment of Je national es . 
the. cost-of-living index number as an alternative to Jewish na-|hearted su port by the mandatory Palestine now. The promises ish industry and agriculture has re- increased pilgrim and tourist traf-| pirations. A solution of the Pales-| Arab Leadership 


re 2! ared|tionalism; second, Agudath Israel, ‘which have been made to them in ®cted unfavorably on the Arabs. fic would constitute an invisible|tine problem’ mu it not only heal) (11) The Arabs are divided po- 
atill stood sbove 350 ae, comp o te Ng ie political outlook is) > Import duties for the protection |¢xport of substantial value to 4a) political rivalries of Jew and Areb, |litically by the personal bicker- 


H igure of 100; that/an organization of orthodox Jews the name of Great Britain, and the 

‘tonthod en at sometimes in-|which supports unrestricted Jewish pride jaa” oan secktehiant athe assurances concerning Palestine of Jewish industries, for example,|country with so large an adverse) t must also safdguard its unique ings of the leaders, which till cen- 
ferior butter were selling at the|immit ration into Palestine whilé|tnat he has turned the desert and given fo Arab leaders by Presi-|are — i. bey oo a of trade; and the contact | religious values. | b brn fiery a mee Sa 3 the 
. , have consum ; vals; reall 
egneren - ars rage By boy fae aa emai ae yen +g ae _~ flowing ee Lew se bly the Arabs of|buying high-priced local products) CHAPTER Vili ; |ctally by the gap which ssparates 
Chat, m one 6 4 ’ edatuin £12 altives of important sections of verde h 5 daniel’ —e tunity |Palestixe as a recognition of the in place of cheaper imported goods. | | ithe small upper class from the 
week were putting in 60 instead of (Middle Eastern Jewry, many flo settlement in ninetenths of|Ptincipie that they should oT onl SP pal Penn lle amt Jews, Arabs and Gavernment [raped ce eee g Ae 
: . : PY e 

the standard 49 Bours 18 Genet tolfations. with, the pro yj Teing nyt gly ab weg Vey ag ‘the wie ahoving eoniion. ‘freedom and material improvement, ‘The State Within the State”;twined. In part *his is a natural strong enough to bridge. 3 
weno ante ee. , lendangered by political Zionism any et ee a Christian Arabs waite with Mos-|they prefer freedom. result of Zioni#t concentration! Consequently, they have devel- 
It remains to be seen whether * jhe has disproved the theory that ms on of these contentions, (8) In exasperation at the disre- (1) The Jews have developed, upon the development of the Jew-\oped no such internal democracy 
the claim of elasticity will be falsi-| Biltmore Plan Held Supported the Jews cannot build a healthy |mne Paved that their inde nd. gard of their objection to Jewish Under the aegis of the Jewish';,) community. Ef the Arabs have|as have the Jews. That their di- 
fied by widespread resistance to community based on the tilling of | *¢Y Hould be recognized at ae immigration, the Arabs of Pales- Agency and the Vaad Leumi, ®/benefited, they have done so only visions have fot been overcome 
downward adjustment of wage) (3) As the result of the public|the soil; frustration that the Jew/ence shou ik . ie : ‘lena have repeatedly risen in re- *tTOng and tightly-woven commu-|in comparison with the non-Palés-and formaliy organized com- 
rates. Jome take the view that in-| hearings and of many private con-|is barred entry to the National nd they — i + a - — y* volt. A substantial number of them rity. There thus exists a virtual|tinian Arabs; whereas they have munity developed is in part the 

creased immigration and a free|versations, we came to the con-|Home, where that conimunity is|*¢'f-governing country, to join the stili declare their allegiance to the Jewish nonterritorial state with its remained far beneath the Palestin- result of @ lems acutely hel? 

flow of imported supplies will|clusion that the Biltmore Program |now in being; pride that he is tak- Arab League. exiled Mufti of Jerusalem and are @W" executive and legislative or-jian Jews in term® of national in- scious nationaiion chen is — 
“automatically” precipitate such a has the support of the overwhelm- ing part in a bold collective ex-| Ibn Saud's Views Recalled satisfied with his policies. In the #478. parallel in many respects to come, social servictes, education and today among the Jews It is ee 
fall in wages and prices as will|ing majority of Zionists. Though | periment; frustration because he) (4) ‘The Arabs attach the high-\second World War, Palestinian tie Mandatory Administration, and! general standard! of living. This ever, also the outcome of a failure 


substantially reduce costs of pro-|many Jews have doubts about feels himself hampered by British) ‘Arebe were on the whole spiritu-/“¢?Ving as the concrete symbol of/has made it easibr for the Arablo¢ political re bili 
| ¥ eat importance to the fulfillment of ‘the Jewish National Home. This) political leaders t¢ keep alive anti- B we pee! Ssaeon valsenies poi 


duction and bring the cost of liv-/wisdem of formulating these ulti-|officials whom he often regards) ‘all tral 
. mate demands, the program has! ; _|the premises made by the British @/Y neutral. ? nt is) , 

aise level. Others po Faw that undoubtedly won the cupport of the ny 1 aelemine ibe feces, ride be Government in the White Paper of} As Jamal Effendi el-Husseini una LL, Seavehiin cae tea rv and manda’ in the minds of the/they regard as s subordinate sta- 
the Government does nothing to|Zionist movement as a wholé,/at iast a free member of a free|2 39. King Abdul Aziz ibn Saud,|stated in his evidence before the | inistration in the maintenance of ’ |tus in the Palestinian state, and 
reduce the cost of living, without Chiefly because it expresses the|community; frustration because he | When he spoke with three meim-/committee, “The Grand Mufti in i. ang order, and in the supres-| ; The economic gulf separating viewing thems+lves as the 

being quite sure what the Govern- Policy of Palestinian Jewry which|tives, not under a freely elected Dera “ the a pee at Le Sgr Metre 17a the matics wha were! "2 of terrorism. . tent - BW 0 phy A Tepteemie : A tates See a 
ment ought to do about it. Mean-/now plays ~mee, * role in the/Gowernment, but under an auto-/made ‘frequent reference both to/tenes s ne th the G but for| | (2) Quite apart from the in-| Jewish policies concerning the non-|self-governing suity 
' uses Jewish Agency. hether this ; ithese promises and to the assur-| warring with the Germans, but for po ? g self-governing . Arab community 
— negree sfarmation of liquid |aimost universal support for thelnee + Kgracm my eeeisint of the|ances given him by the late Presi-|the interests of his people who had — hwo ge of the A nnmenr employment of Arab labor on land/parallel to that of the Jews. Nor, 
ae ee a ident Roosevelt at their meeting inno direct interest, at least, in the Bangs, ich enjoy widespre rchased by the Jewish National so far, have thay been prepared to 


; |demand for a Jewish State is based po 
Fon ae everson fal knowledge of the implca:|White Paper of 2680" the mande:|Februnry. 104, ila Majenty made controversy.” ‘They fo that It wag NoPules suppor there are many| Fund, and the réfuaal to devote] ee their postion elle i Question 
or unusable money resources, “ons of the policy and of the risksitory power has slowed up the de-/Clear the strain which would be ne Py may! ist. propaganda are beginning to|to the improvement of Arab stande| teen nee ee eee re ae thee 
5 laced ‘upon Arab friendship with was right in taking such steps as P rads tions for the Ajab Higher tommit- 
poured out in the process of fi involved in carrying it out i8, Of|velopment of the National Home P m po United he could to do the best for Pales-|#ffect detrimentally the Jewish/ards of living. Ef‘orts by the Jews tee, or the formation of , 
nancing the war, is substantially|©oUrse, quite another matter. in order to placate Arab opposi-|Great Britain and the United States, time whoever might be victorious, |@ducational system. It appears to|in this direction rhight be quite as\bes ~ oe iyo Dh Ss, 
unrelieved. a pm penet differnet, hereon je al outden sise of taanigve 1° aoa  tattanal of — Ne (9) The White Paper of 1930, 8 wholly harmful that the obliga- important for the growth and secu-| ure is ccogutahl | by the new intel- 
Economic Expansion and |where the issue is not the achieve-| power had as its direct result the|The sa:ne warning was repeated by|4nd the drastic limitation of Jew-| a F aye ‘ ciated’ ter th oa —_ rity of the National Home as the/iigentsia which, however, is un- 

: ; |ment of a remote idea, but is re- lan Arab witness in Jerusalem, who !sh immigration and of land sales "0 twe, Snell ye Jewiet/draining of swamp lands or the/likely to exercise much power un- 
Immigration garded as a matter of life and| crit quimne atch tre sen ee toleaid that “Zioniam for the Arabs to Jews which followed, met the|Agency and the Vaad Leumi, isjcreation of Jewish industry. itil it haw the backing of a larger 

(21) Leaving aside these uncer-/4egtn for the Jewish nation, the|train himesif for eclfedeferse andjhas become a test of Western in-|Ared view only in part. The Arabs|row Partly used for military train-| | (4) But unfortunately there are|middie class. 
tainties of the moment, there C82 \position is naturally more ‘com. te acoustem timeelé to the ‘ite of tentions.” would have gone much further, The |!" aa — of a hardening of the Jewish Need for Arab Education 
be little doubt that, given some|piex Palestinian Jewry is riddled|e pioneer in tp stockade (5) The suggestion that self-\demands voiced by their leaders| : The “closing of the ranks,” more-jattitude toward the Arabs. Too uca 
central direction, more cooperative with party differences. The num- e high barbed wire and ‘the|government should be withhela|*re for immediate independence, |cver, whieh we noted above, has/often the Jew is cantent to refer to| (12) Many Arabs are graduates 
effort, and a peaceful political at-\ner of political newspapers and|watchtowers, manned by the set-|from Palestine until the Jews have|{o% the final cessation of Jewish licreased the totalitarian tenden-|the indirect benefite accruing to of the Americah University at Bei- 
mosphere, Palestine could be made periodicals bears witness to theltienent rolice day aad night acquire’ a majority seems out-|!mmigration and for the prohibi-|cies to which a nationalist society|the Arabs from hfs coming, and to/rut; a few have studied in univer- 
to previde further opportunities) variety and vitality of this political strike the a: ->* the visitor as bes lraaeews to the Arabs. They wish to ‘lor of all land sales by Arabs to|is always liable. To speak of a|leave the matter there. Passionate-|sities in Cairo, England, Europe 
for prosperous settlement, concur life, and, apart from pre®sure €X-|approaches ever collective colony.|be masters in their own house, J¢¥S. |Jewish terror would be a gross ex-|ly loving every foct of Erets Ierasl,jand the United States; others 
rently with an improvement in the|erteq on Jews considered to be dis-| the are en p mace symbol of |The eArabs were opposed to the (10) So bare an outline gives sggeration. But there are dis-/he finds it almost impossible to have received higher education at 
living standards of its present jova] to the National Home, we|the Pe. attitude to life and politics idea of a Jewish national home OMly an inadequate picture of the/ quieting indicationa that illegal or-\look st the issue from the Arab) the Arab College for men and the 
population, Some progress toward found little evidence to support the! which developed among the Pal-jeven before the Biltmore Program| P&s#ion with which Arabs in Pales-|ganization and the atmosphere of|point of view, and to realize the| Women's Training College in Jeru- 
central direction was made unfer|rymors that it was dangerous tolestinian Jews between 1936 and/and the demand for a Jowiaal State, Une and in neighboring countries conspiracy, which inevitably ac-|depth of feeling aroused by his “in-|salem, both of which are *fficient 
stress of war, and arrangements advocate minority views. Of thelig3g As a Jewish settler said to| Needles to say, however, their op- resent the invasion of Palestine by|companies it,are having their cor-|vasion” of Palestifie. He compares but inadequate’y financed Govern- 
are in hand to provide for its con-jmajor political parties, Mapai (the a member of the committee: ‘position has become more intense!® People which, though originally | roding effects on that free democ-/his own achievenents with the/ment institutions. 
tinuance. Labor Party) is far the biggest! “we aré the vanguard of & greatiand more bitter since that program Semitic, now represents an alien racy which has always been the slow improvemenja made by the! The Arabs sre aware of Waat- 

The War Supply Board, under/and largely determinés the official army, defending the advanc o-|was adopted \civilization. Even the Moslems of pride of the Palestinian Jews.|Arab v ¢, always to the disad-jern civilization and iners ly 
which the capacity of local indus-|jine, sitions until the reinforcements ot (6) The "arebe maintain that|™dia have made representations| very thoughtful Jew with whorm)vantage of the latter; and for ete eager to share its benefits. t 
try was enlarged and directed to! Opposed to the Agency's policy| rive from Europe.” they have never been anti-Semiti ¢;|t the committee in opposition to we talked was profoundly 4a-|the enormous fingncia}, education-|the numbers receiving such educa- 
war production, is shortly to b@/are two main.groups, On the one . indeed, they are Semites them.|Z/onism. turbed by these symptoms. Buti/al and technical’ advantages be-|tion are still miserably smaéli, since 
transformed into a full-fledged De-|side stand two small but impor- Arab Violence Recalled Sditan Aiea tmateeaueael etedenn! Cultures Held to Clash mone was bold enough te prophesy|stowed upon him ky world Zionism./the only univérsity in Palestine, 
pamtment of Commerce and Indus-'tant parties: the Conservative! (8) The Jews in Palestine GT0lsn. eventest 6 th ty rtenoy tuat they would disappear so long) When challenge’ on his relations| the Hebrew Uhiversity on Mount 
try. The War Economic Advisory!Aliyah Hadashah (New Settlers),/convinced that Arab violence paid. gre ympatny pe | One witnesses in Palestine not fis the Palestine Administration|with the Arabs, he is too often con- | Scopus, teaches only in Hebrew. 
Council, notwithstanding the with-|drawn chiefly from colonists of/Throughout the Arab rising, the| Tyo have nor felt it necessary to enter into Merely the impact of European'carried out a policy which seémsitent to point out fhe superficial So, too, with s*condary education. 
drawal of the Arab members, is to German and western European ex-|Jews in the national home, despite |the historical arguments based upon undertek-|Culture upon the East but also the th every Jew to be in direct con-|friendiiness of everyday life in| There are only some fifteen 
carry on its consultative work in'traction, and Hashomer Hatzain, alevery provocation, obeyed the sitters Mee lt eee Gohan during the impact of Western science and travention of his natural rights. itown and villag¢—a friendliness Arab secondafy schools in the 
, which indubitabi® exists. In so|whole of Pale¢tine, and one fully 


™ 7 d exet-|last war 6nd interpreted by the Arabs as prom-| Western technology upon a semi- 
the shaping and eggieation of Ci-imcetelin Batty. | Satan Sate. Seer 0 ee eels eens we mang” other | things | thet | Palestine feudal civilization, It is not sur- Jewish Relations With Arabs doing, he someti:nes ignores the|developed agricultural school—the 


ficial policy. The Government of mariding the right of unrestricted|cised a remarkable self-discipline. \woula bedome an independent Arab country | ; 
Palestine itself has brought to an immigration and land settlement,|/They shot, but only in self-defense; | This, aceon Ce Ae, BM prising that the Arabs have bitter-' . (3) Not only is the Jewish com-|deep political antagoniam which in-|Kadeorie School at Tulkarrn which 
advanced stage a program of post-'challenges the concept of the Jew-|they rarely took reprisals on the jan essential part of the Arad case and were ly resented this invasion and have/rjunity largely independent of and spires the whole Arab community; |specializes in the training of 
war carvelopment, covering andi Stale and perticart enh Aree Ropeiaton Thy, tee, Me Sate aiz Mei atteia flay tvuecton’ Palen “al qncan, Tut it cis que Selowsy oy staan Ut tae eleceenes ee oe Are 
reclamation, afforestation and/sizes the need for cooperation with /|ter at the rewa or re-|committee, containing statements of both the) AT v er -| schools. ’ ; 

other soil conservation measures|the Arabs. Hashotner Hatzain, straint was the conference and the|Ars>, #74 the British point bayer ne ‘sere based on the clan; leadership re- jtinet from and in conflict with the sult of self-seeking propaganda by; With only sixty-five ptaces, how- 
and irrigation. \though it did not appear before us,'White Paper of 1939. The documents under examination were printed | sides in a small group of influen-'Arab community with which, in jthe rich effendi cluss. ee é' 

(22) In addition, the expansion published shortly before we left The mandatory power, they Shot cna sees wait of 1989). pers N*'tial families, and it is almost im- piany areas, it is territorially inter-' (5) It is not unfair to say that Continued on Following Page 


© “ 
‘ 


of- 
ro- 











18 


Anglo-U. S 


Continued From Preceding Page 


ever, it tdéo is totally inadequate. 
The problem of teaching modern 
methods of agriculture to a popu- 
lation 80 per cent of which gains 


its living by farm has not yet 
been solved by the Government or|questions in the House of Comt- 


faced by the Arab politicians. Fa-|mons, and must therefore be sup- 
cilities for Sochnteel e@asation are |erviseé —" closely by the re- 
no better—a single school with ——, ay sie take : 
some sixty places. (18) ile admitting on ait 

(13) On the primary level the/°ulty, we must en view 
poition is slightly better. The|‘hat Ba system a tales ss 
schoots are under the control of |&t@vely against 7 a 
the administration and financed by ree ge o> age - ew 
public funds. As far as i the sit ag sean nee 
primary education is well planned ae | uation — ~~ always 
and administered. It is not merely |S*Uc® guccess- 
a bookish education, but includes 

manual training and instruc- 

tion in griculture, where the equip-| 
ment is available. Some of the 
school gardens which surround the - 


schools in the Arab v 
of the national home with 
models of neatness and skill. But soe the Arabs of Paiestine is m1 


the fact remains that something) deed 
leas than half the Arab children (19) In Palestine itself we also 


who would like to attend school 
can do so today. . 

Even in a wealthy town like 
Haifa, we were told by the Munic- 
ipal Commission that half the Arab 
boys and the majority of the Arab 

tis reteive no education at all. 


of 
Palestine has probably less free- 
dom of action than the adminis- 


quence of the dominant role 
politics in the life of the country. 


the situation is still worse, 
larly with re 

ore Arab girl in 
education. 

(14) This is all the more tragic 
since the desire for education is ter 
now strong throughout the poorer 
classes, not merely in the cities, 


but in almost every Arab village. | ohio complaint is often made, is 


Igdeed, some villages visited by 
the committee had either built their|PeTUy © remult of this and partly 


own schools completely from vol- 
untary subscriptions by the vil- 
lagers or had contributed largely 
to their cost on their own initiative. 
(15) The lamentable condition 
of Arab education is a rea] cause 
for discontent. This discontent is 
increased by the contrast with the 
opportunities offered to the Jewish 
child. Jewish education in Pales- 
tine is financed by the Jewish com- 
munity and by the fees which Jew- 
en can afford to pay. Prac- 
y every Jewish child has the 
opportunity for primary education, 
and those who can afford the fees colonial type ia the ideal instru- 
have ample opportunity for tech-|ment for governing two peoples 
nical, secondary and university|each of which, in the absence of 
education in Palestine. The Gov-|the other, would probably by now 
ernment contributes @  « small/be enjoying complete independence. 
per capita grant in ' exer-; On the other hand, it seeme dif- 
cises little control « 
lum 


at 


portan 

self obliged to give much of his 
time to conducting relations of a 
quasi-diplomatie character with 
the leaders of the Arab and Jewish 
communities. 


Described as Urique Land 
(20) Palestine is 4 unique coun- 


may be questioned therefore 
whether an ministration of the 


ricu-ificuit to foresee radical changes 


in the system so long as the divi- 
sion between Arabs and Jews com- 
pels British officials to assume so 
extensive a responsibility, and jn 
view of the fact that their actions 
must be accounted for both to Par- 
liament and to an international 
organization, each responsive to a 
keenly interested pu>lic opinion. 
(21) What is not open to ques- 
tion is the patience and loyaity 
to their task of the officials on 
whose shoulders rests the main 
burder of this heavy responsibil- 
ity. We were impressed also by the 
generally high standard of the dis- 
trict administration, It is difficult 
for those who have not visited 
Palestine to imagine the tension 
under which these officiais—Arab 
and Jewish, as well as British 
are compelled to live and work. 
We were especially impressed by 
the anxiety, loneliness and nervous 
strain to which many police of- 


(16) It is difficult to avoid the 
eonclusion that the time has come 
for the Arab community to assume 
the same responsibility with regard 
to education as the Jewish. ith 
advice and financial aid from the 
Govemmnment, and with a new sense 
of responsibility on the part of the 
Arab leadership, compulsory edu- 
cation could, we were informed, be 
introduced within the next ten 
years. This is not only essential 
from an educational point of view; 
there can be no real unity between 
a literate and an illiterate popula- 
tion. 


The Administration 


(17) Palestine is administered 
by officials of the British Colonial 
Service, Subject to the provisions 
of the mandate, all major decisions 
of policy are taken in London as 
they would be for a colonial terri- 
tory. As Mr. Churchill has said:|ficiais are unavoidably exposed. It 

“The suggestion that the high|elso seemed to us that the civil 
commissioner either has a policy|servants in Palestine were sub- 
of his own contradistinction to|jected to an additional anxiety 
that of His Majesty's Government,|which we could not vegard as un- 
or that, if this were so, His Ma-|avoidable or in the best interests of 
esty's Government would permit|the country, as a result of the gen- 

im to carry it out, would be for-jerally and sometimes pitifully in- 
eign to all the traditions of British|adequate salaries which they at 
administration.” present receive, 


CHAPTER IX 
Publie Security 


(1) Palestine is an armed camp.|press reports, was expected to land 
We saw signs of this almost asithe immigrants at tel Aviv, and| 
soon as we crossed the frontier,|the plans for screening the immi-| 
and we became more and more|grants were evident in the sporadic 
aware of the tense atmosphere|incidents which occurred in that 
each day. Many buildings havejarea. Apart from firing on the po- 
barbed wire and other defenses.|lice, there were incicents of min-| 
We ourselves were closely guarded|ing and blocking of access by road 
by armed police, and often escort-\|and rail which could only de- 
ed by armored cars. It is obviousisigned to isolate the approach to 
that very considerable military|the beach. 
forces and large numbers of police} (4) A sinister aspect of recent 
are kept in Palestine. The police|years is the development of large 
are armed; they are conspicuous illegal armed forces. The following 
everywhere; and throughout thejis the structure as stated to us by 
country there are substantially|the military authorities: 
built police barracks. The general organization is the 
(2) We do not think that the|“Hagana.” It is an iliega! develop-| 
conditions in Palestine since the|ment of the former organization, 
mandate have been fully appre-jin the days of Turkish rule, of 
eiated throughout the world. * * *\armed watchmen who protected! 
Up to the year 1939 the Jews ex-|Jewish settlements. Today it is| 
ercised very great restraint. It is|completely organized, under a cen- 
in recent years that the threat to/tral control and with subsidiary 
law and order has come from them. |territorial commands, in three 
(3) A revival of the iliegal im-|branches, each of which includes 
migration traffic has occurred) women, viz: 
since the end of the war in/A static force composed of settlers 
Europe. During the summer of| and townsfolk, with an estimated) 
1945 there was an influx on a| strength of 40,000; 
#ubstantial scale by land over the|A field army, based on the Jewish 
northern frontier. More recently Settlement Police and trained in 
there have been successive cases) ™°Té¢ Mobile operations, with an 
ostimated strength of 16,000; 
of entry by sea. The Jewish or- A full t Pel | 
ganizations are actively en in ull-time force ( mach), per-| 
these © gaged manently mobilized and provided 
perations, carried out lat-| with trans with an estimated 
terly by the purchése or charter of . 
peace establishment of 2,000 and 
ships for voyages from southern! war establishment of 6,000, 
Europe in the absence of effective 
control of embarkation. Armed| Arming of Hagana Related 


clashes are liable to arise from the 
efforts to prevent interference; >: ed. = — Chat the apne oe 
number have arisen from the|-p oe Cunné arms over & pe 
of years. Vast quantities have been 
— a oo > obtained from the residue of the 
dents directly concerned with il- ——— tam nace — 
Jegal immigration, may be cited/anq concealed in speciail an 
the sabotage of patrol launches|structed caches in settlements and 
and attacks on coast guard sta-| 
tions jtowns. The following are cu- 
. lars, furnished to us by the mill- 
Ships’ Interception Reported tary authorities, of a search which 
The present scale and method of “8% conducted at Biriya settle- 
{legal immigration by sea can be|ment about the time of our arrival 
seen from three recent cases. Two|!" Palestine. 
ships arrived toward the end of gd the night of the 27th- 
our stay in Palestine, and one a/28th February, 1946, shots were 
few weeks prev jously. All three fired at a sentry of the Arab Le- 
vere intercepted and, in accordance|sion at his post distant some mile 
with the usual procedure, the il-|/°T mile and a half from Biriya. Al- 
legal immigrants taken to a clear-|though wounded in the thigh, he 
ance camp where, subject to check,|Teturned the fire. Next morning 
they were released, their numbers|Dlood stains and bandages were 
being deducted from the ra-|found and police dogs carried a 
tion quota. The first of these ships|line direct from there to Biriys. 
sailed from northern Italy. It was Biriya is situated in a command- 
her maiden voyage. She carried|ing position on the hills of north- 
911 immigrants, 554 men and 357\ern Galilee. It can only be de- 
women. Practically all were yo scribed as a fort. 
people. The second carried 247 im- ep of Biriya were 
migrants, of whom eighty-nine|detainec. They consi of 25 
were women. With one exception,;men. Their identity cards showed 
all were young people. The chard, oes they came from other parts 
which arrived on the day of our de-/of Palestine. It was apparent that 
parture from Palestine, was re-\they were a platoon undergoing 
ported in the press as coming from training. 
a French Mediterranean port and; A search in the neighborhood re- 
carrying 733 immigrants. aled two arms caches. They con- 


| 


' 
j 


ve 


THE NEW YORK TIM 


. Report Analyzes Government Problems Entailed in 
| Indeed, the adininistration MEMBERS OF THE ANGLO-AMERICAN PALESTINE COMMISSION 


Left to right, seated: Frank W. Buxton, Urited States; Lerd Morrison, Britain; Joseph C. Hutcheson, 
United States chairman; Sir John E. Singleton, British chairman; Frank Aydelotte, United States, and 
Richard H, 8. Crossman, Britain. Left to right, standing: Wilfred F. Crick, Britain; James G. McDonald, 
United States; Maj. Reginald E. Manningham-Buller, Britain; Bartley C. Crum, United States; Sir Fred- 
erick Leggett, Britain, and William Phillips, United States. Associated Press 


one Sten gun, one Bren, four mod-| We set out in the form of an|Majesty’s Government continued 
ern rifles, one wireless set, and|extract from the Palestine Post of their responsibility for the govern- 
grenades the 30th December, 1945, the atti- ment of the whole of Palestine. 


Num documents were also We have considered the matter 
daneevened tn the po Ray Their|tude of the Chairman of the Exec-|, new and we have heard the views 


substance connected the caches|Utive of the Jewish Agency after|\of various witnesses of great ex- 
with Biriya, and a police dog tak-|the murders »f the 27th December, |perience. Partition has an appeal 
ing scent from the documents iden-|1945, In the course of his evidence|®t first sight as giving a prospect 


ed one of the if- 
f men in the build- of early independence and se 
tits ~ on before us Mr. Ben Gurion said that ove a. Cag eg Bg 


ing at Biriya. The documents in- 
cluded standing orders for the but in our view no partition would 
camp, notes on the structure and have any chance unless it was 
duties of the Hagana, training basically acceptable to Jews and 
manuals, notes on neighboring mil- Arabs, and there is no sign of that 
itary and police camps. today. We are accordingly unable 
(5) Something in the nature of|—) 45, and Mr. M. Shertok to see|?,ecommend partition as the so- 

conscription is in force, as is show? |im at Government House on Fri- lution, 
two press notices of the 6th | Ge morning, it was officially|,(4) Palestine {s @ country un- 
ovember, 1945: y be like any other. It is not merely 
stated yesterday. a place in which Arabs and Jews 
PALESTINE POST “It ia learned that during the| TE Millions ef people through 
“A year’s national service aaierviow. i oe yy — ond Mr. lout the world take a fervent in- 
communal settlements will now be|Shertok dec — =| din ‘ ted| terest in Palestine and in its holy 
required from all Jewish senior Agency coraple ely ss0cis ‘places and are deeply grieved by 


| derous 
school children aged 17-18; till now|themselves from the mur the thought that it has been the 
a ‘attacks on Government and army|.0%. of trouble for so long and by 


it was obligatory only to those 
who had already left school.” establishments perpetrated onthe fear that it may well become 
Thursday night. They expressed Lord 
ABOKE ithe cockpit of another war. Lo 
a R their profound sorrow at the loss)yi).4. in 1923, having declared 
(In this case a translation from/of life caused by the attacks. himself a strong supporter of pro- 
Hebrew) “But, they stated, any efforts by| , reb policy, said: 
“The national institutions heve|the Jewish Agency to assist in , 
decided to widen the scope of the preventing such acts would be ren- Palestine can never be regarded 
year’s service duty, which up to/dered futile by the policy pursued) &* ® country on the came footing 
° 4-\in Palestine by His Majesty's Gov-| * the other Arab countries. 
wae wher Pou imposed = Eek; \ernment on which the primary re-| cannot ignore all nisteny and 
uates of the secondary schools, _| tradition in the matter. You can- 
to impose it on all girls and boys| sponsibility rests for the tragic sit not ignore the fact that this is 
aged 17-18 uation createi in the country, and the cradle of two of the great re- 
“The Council of Youth Organi- which had led in recent weeks to ligions of the world, It is a sacred 
zations decided at its session on/Dloodshed ard innocent victims) i414 to the Arabs, but it is also 
31/10/45 immediately to begin ful-|™0ng Jews, Britons and others. | 4 sacred land to the Jews and the 
fillment of the order given to the|. “The Jewisn Agency representa~| Christian; and the future of Pal- 
Youth. The Council assumed the|tives added that it was difficult to) estine cannot possibly be left to 
responsibility of enlisting imme- appeal to the Yishuv to observe! be determined by the temporary 
diately all members of the move-|*¢ law at a time when the Man-| jmpressions and feelings of the 
mes fe were born in 1928. The|4atory Goversiment itself was con-| Arab majority in the country of 
enlistment of the pupils of the sec-|sistently violsting the fundamental! the present day. 
ondary and erate’ exon will be|!@w of the country embodied in the; The Peel Commission having 
cnantan out at a time which is to| Palestine Mandate.” cited those words wrote (Chapter 
be jally fixed. Before 11/11/45 So long as this kind of view is /II, paragraph 51): “The case 
every ‘movement must submit’ to/put forward by the leaders of the|stated by Lord Milner against an 
the y, Jewish Agency's Recruiti ewish Agency it is impossible to|Arab control of Palestine applies 
Department in Tel Aviv a yao look for settled conditions, equally to a Jewish control.” That 
of or mena bak male and female, A!! three organizations to which expresses our view absolutely. 
who must enlist.” 


reference has been made are illegal. btente ot Gavemamnand Meentiet 
A useful adjunct for training 


We recognize that until com- oan & - hag 

aratively recently, efforts were o ave en made from 
a ney By gga Lo mode by the Jewish Agency to|time to time to encourage both 
- on li t , ri ge curb attacks; we regret that these|Arabs and Jews to take part in 
mamsney  pesee | Sense orig! Yl efforts a pear to have ceased. We/the government of the country but 
—— = Fae Rap aller mg os these efforts have failed through 


believe that those responsible for a oat . os 
minimum term of service is six the working of the Jewish Agency|mutual antagonism; perhaps they 
months, during which period they 


—a body of great power and in-| might have been pursued further. 

fluence over the Jews in Palestine It is not the case of a backward 
are paid by the Government. We) _ ould do a great deal towards|people going through a period of 
were informed that it often hap-|..tting an end to ou such as|tutelage; the issue lies between 

that they leave the police|... have described, which place the| Jews and Arabs. 

orce after @ short period of serv-|.onie of Palestine as well as| We believe this can only be met 
ice and thereafter serve in the) british soldiers and police in con-|by acceptance of the principle that 
Hagana. stant danger. there shall be no domination of 

(6) Apart from the Hagana,two| private armies ought not to|the one by the other, that Pal- 
further ee armed orgahiza-|exist; they constitute a danger to estine shall be neither an Arab nor 
tions exist, both having cut @w8Yithe peace of the world. a Jewish state, The setting up of 
from the parent body. One is the! (8) ‘The position of Great Britain self-governing institutions is de- 
“Irgun Zvai Leumi,” which was\as mandatory is not a happy one.|pendent on the will to work to- 
formed in 1985 by dissident mem-|The chairman of the Executive of|gether on the part of Jews and 
bers of the Hagana. The other|tne Jewish Agency said that, in the|Arabs. There has been little sign 
ig the “Stern Group” which broke|event of the withdrawal of the/of that in recent years and yet we 
away from the Irgun early in the/British troops, the Jews would take|hope a change may take place if 
war when the latter announced 4N\care of themselves. Jama! Effendi|and when the fear of dominance is 
“armistice.” The Irgun operates|trusseini, replying to a question,|removed. We do not think that 
under its own secret command|said that it was the wish of the|any good purpose would be served 
mainly in sabotage and terrorism|Arabs of Paiestine that British|by our going into further detail; 
against the mandatory;  its|forces and police should be with-|once the will to work tagether ap- 
strength is estimated at from/drawn forthwith. Auni Bey Abdul| pears, representatives of both sides 
3,000 to 5,000. The Stern Group/Hadi, also representing the Arab/will be of help in framing a con- 
engages in terrorism; its strength/Higher Committee, expressed his|stitution; until that happens no 
is said to be between 200 and 300. ment. jamal Effendi Hus-|step can be taken. 

(7) It seems clear that the ac-iseini stated that he did not expect! Moantime Palestine must re- 
tivities of all these bodies could be|bloodshed but that, on the with-|main under some form of mandate 
greatly reduced if there was any/drawal of British Forces, there |or trusteeship. We have suggested 
cooperation with the authorities by| would be a return to the condition |eisewhere in our report that much 
the Jewish Agency and its officers,/which preceded the first World|can be done to encourage general 
and by the rest of the population.|War (i.e. pre-Balfour Declara-|savancement by the improvement 
Unfortunately the Jewish Agency|tion). Ws are clear in our minds|o¢ educational facilities and meas- 
ceased to cobperate with the Gov-ithat if British forces were with-|ures directed to narrowing the so- 
ernment, or at least reduced the/drawn there would be immediate| cia) and economic disparities. 
measure of their cooperation asiand prolonged bloodshed, the end of} ws fee} too, that it should be 
from the end of the war. |which it is impossible to predict. | possible to draw the communities 


CHAPTER X closer together, and foster a popu- 


lar interest. in self-government at 
General 


the local level. Especially in the 
country districts, a spirit of good 

(1) In view of the dissolution ofjformed. They recommended the|"¢ighborliness exists among the 
the League of Nations and of the|termination of the mandate, the|/Common people, Arabs and Jews, 
statement of the Secretary of|partition of the country between|‘esp‘te the general state of polit- 
State for Foreign Affairs in the|the Arabs and the Jews (excepting|!c®! tension in the country. 


“Following upon the outrages 
which occurred on Thursday night, 


sioner sumrioned Mr. Ben 








rac- 


House of Commons on the 13th|the holy places) and the setting up/tical cooperation is evident in day-| 


November, 1945, we assume that/of two independent states in treaty |‘O-d#y affairs. 
the British Government wil! in the|relations with Great Britain. We suggest that local adminis- 
near future prepare a draft trus-| These recommendations were re-|trative areas might be formed, 
teeship agreement for eventual|jected by the Arabs and they did|some purely Arab or Jewish in 
submission to the United Nations,|not meet with the complete ap-|composition, but some of mixed 
and that this agreement will in-|proval of the Jews. They were|Population where a corporate sense 
clude the terms under which Pales-|adopted in the first instance by|°f civic responsibility can be en- 
tine will be administered. * * * ‘the Government of Great Britain,|couraged and «a new beginning 
(2) Our views on future immi-/but subsequently a technical com-|made in the development of self- 
tion policy are contained in'mission was sent to Palestine to|government. 
endation No. 6 and in the,ascertain facte and to consider in| (5) Land questions have been 
comments thereunder, and we have|detail the practical possibilities of|the cause of much friction and dis- 
no to add to them. a scheme of pertition. pute between Jews and Arabs. We 
ith regard to the future; Asa result cf the 
government of Palestine, we have/mission’s repcrt, 


(3) tion com-|are opposed to legislation and prac- 
is Majesty's\tices which discriminate against 
reviewed the question of a solution|Government announced their con-|sither, and for the reasons already 
by partition. clusion that the examination by|given we recommend the rescission 
the Peel Commission stated|the commission had shown thatiand replacement of the Land 
(Chapter XX, paragraph 19):\the political, administrative and|Tranafers Regulations of 1940 and 
Manifestly the problem cannot be/financial difficulties involved injthe prohibition of restrictions 
solved by gi either the Arabs|the proposal to create independent|limiting employment on certain 
or the Jews all y want. The an-|Arab and Jewish states inside|lands to members of one race, com- 
swer to the question ‘which of them/|Palestine were so t that the/munity or creed. 
in the end will ern Palestine?'|solution of the problem was im-| We are eware of the criticisms 
must surely be ‘Neither.’” That is 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


You | 


racticable. The proposal accord-jof the existing land ordinances|-—— 
The second ship, according to'tained, among other equipment,/the view which we also have'ingly fell to the ground, and His and we do not wish it to be go” {aia Preneh 1.000: American M- Wor. Polish Jows. The number in 


Issue of Palestine H 


——— 


omeland 


— 


thouglit that we consider that they|established «a special : cormittee| tne British zone lsst November 
afford uate protection to the| for its consideration. |was in the neighborhood of 5,00. 
Arab owners and tenants; without presuming to advise|Partly owing to the activities of 
|that committee, and wiih no desire|the Jewish Brigade of the British 

to beyord our Terms of Refer-|Army, a considerable number mic- 

Rs in ae cota Palestine nin we cennot but odserve that/ceeded in crossing the Italian fron- 
they may reside. international bodies alrzady estab- tier, though the tote! number who 
(6) We have already stated that! lished for dealing with refugee have crossed since Inst summer ie 
the 109,000 certificates for Pales-| problems have been unable, through not assessed at more than 3,000, 
tine, the immediate authorization insufficiency of financial resources|[ater the Jewish Brigade were 
of which we recommend, will pro-|or other reasons, to fulfill the .i+pqrawn and the frontier con 


vide for only a com y small|/hopes placed in them at the time} ols tightened. 


; Id look 
rion of the total number of|of their formation. The world looks| (9) In Vienna converge two 
streams of migrants, one from Fo- 


lewish. refugees in Europe. forward, we believe, to the Hye of} 
The general problem of refugees|a truly effective agency o ar 
must, oe feel, Bo dealt with by the|national coilaboration in the hu-|!and ee pn 
United: Nations. In our considered) manitarian task of migration and minvente usually enntiaue werte 
on it is a matter for regret! resettlement. ward through Enns and 
this distresaing problem has —-  . 
net be t with before this) We make grateful acknowledg- to the American zone of Germany. 
hg wae : ers have|ment of our deep indebtedness to On arrival in Vienna the Jews sre 
van mie eae ¢ with y dis-/our two Governments. ‘They have/some members of the Committee 
Sinced "persona ut, the fect re|aiven us willing and. Abi Aasat-|vsied one of them the Rothechid 
mains that Jews and others have) ance throughout our lo“ig journey- them that 150 Hungarian Jewish 


possible for us) 
av omptone the at ‘within the children and 90 Rumanian Jewish 
period allotted. jadults had arrived by train from 
Our staff listed in the Appendix|Budapest the day before, and ¢x~- 
has worked admirably and effi-|Plained that the American Array 
authorities allowed the American 


ressu in 
Cy see Pree re nnd often in Jewish Joint Distribution Commit. 


very many months. 
We ‘observe that at a recent 
mee of the General Assembly 
nited Nations the problem 
of displaced and refugees 


pe 08 com a see ee eg ber Finally, we desire to tender our tee to collect Jews in Hungary and 


be | oa ..— * ka to our e(ficient sec-|*° Organiz® their arrival in grouys. 
ena Be al panel which —o retaries, H. G. Vincent, L. L. Rood, Training Center Operated 
& we H. Beeley, «snd E. M. Wilson. (10) The Vienna Area Command 


Brgned at Lausanne, Switzerland, on April 20, 1944. operates transient centers for Jews 


at the Rothschild Hospital and the 
JosernH C. HUTCHESON, Joun E. SINGLETON, Strudelhofgass, through which 
American Chairman. British Chairmen, 


3,085 Jews in December 
last, 3,229 in January, 2,443 in 
. February and 1,150 in March. Tran- 
FRANK AypeLottTs, United States. sient centers were also opened at 
Frank W. Buxton, United States. |Enns and Salzburg in the Ameti- 
: jcan zone, 
W. F. Cason, Unites we gaem. While at first endeavoring to 
Bartiey C. Crum, United 8tetes. American authorities felt impelled 
Freverick Leccett, United Kingdom. _ by humanitarian considerations to 
R. E. MANNINGHAM-BULLER, United Kingilom. 
James G. McDONALD, United States. 
[Lorp] Morrison, United Kingdom. 
WILLIAM PHILLIPS, United Stetes. 


accept all who had arrived, after 
much hardship, at the border of 

Lesuiz L. Roop, H. G. VINCEN?, 
American Secretary. British Secretary. 


the zone. 
(11) We found that the Jews 
EvAN M. WILSON, H. BEELey, 
American Secretary. British Secreta*y. 





| 
| 


Jan. 
| Jan. 


Feb. 


Feb. 


} 
| 


Feb. 


Feb. 
| Feb. 
| Feb. 
| Feb. 


| Feb. 
Feb. 


Feb. 
Mar. 
| Mar. 


Mar. 
Mar 
Mar 


| 
| 
| 


jwere sent by train from Vienna 
through the Russian zone te Enna 
jand left a day or so later by lor 
ries for Salzburg. They arrived in 
groups of 200. In the Salzbu: 
transient camp which we visit: 
there wag accommodation for 250 
and we were told that the officer 
sien responsible had given instructions 
oe Ix I that the number was to be kept at 
J that figure. 
APPEND The period of residence at this 
Itinerary of Committee camp was limited. The camp was 
4-17, 1946-—Washington, full committee. o number of Jews aad thay ealaa 
28-Feb. 4--London, full committee. lout the names of those who were 
5-15—American zone of Germany and Czechoslovakia, Bartley!) | ove on. The flow through this 
Satted winedem States, and Sir Frederici Leggett, amp wee ‘oh the rate of 2.000 a 
5-22—Paris, French zones of Germany and Austrit, William oa jell mags pt got 
ar amp 
Phillips, United States, and James G. McDon#ld, United) ..’. tn. extent of the escemme- 
States. : 
$-17—Berlin, Judge Joseph C. Hutcheson, United States; a yea ie gg ba any 
John Singleton, United Kingdom; Lord Morrigon, United ports and the way in which Jews 
Kingdom; Frank W. Buxton, United States; I. E. Man-|\ 0. accumulating in Vienna, he 
ningham-Buller, United Kingdom, and W. 'F. Crick, |. uthorized the dispatch of eo ei 
United Kingdom. ‘ ¢ 
7-13—Poland, Messrs. Buxton, Manninghem-Buller xnd Crick. | 0 Me od ncaa’ eae 
§-11—British zone of Germany, Judge Hutcheson, Sir John). \, would take them through to 
; Singleton and Lord Morrison. Salzburg 
¥-25—Vienna, full committee. : 
13-22—American zone of Austria, Messrs. Buxton, Manningham- Different Practice Noted 
Buller and Crick. | This showed quite a different 
25-26—British zone of Austria, Messrs. Crum and Crossman.| practice from that adopted in the 
24-27—-Italy, Sir John Singleton, Mr, Phillips, Mr. McDonald| British zone, where efforts were 
and Sir Frederick Leggett. jmade to prevent unauthorized mi- 
2#-Mar. 5—Cairo, full committee. gration. We pointed this out, and 
&-28—Paleatine, full committee. we have now been advised that 
1i+-20—Damascus and Beirut, Judge Hutcheson, Loré Morrison the practice in the American sone 
and Mr. McDonald. has been changed and that it now 
1@-21—Baghdad and Riyadh, Sir John Singleton, Mr. Buxton accords with that followed in the, 
and Mr. Manningham-Buller. British zone. This, we believe, is 
. 24-24—Amman, Lord Morrison, Mr. Phillips and Sir Frederick a}! to the good. Tholigh on occa- 
’ Leggett. jsions Jews still arrive in Vienra 
. 20-April 20-—-Lausanne, full committee. in substantial numbers by train, 
their onward movement is fo 
; APPENDIX II longer being facilitated. 
; | These migrants now receive the 
Eurapean Jewry-—Position in Various Countries |, * ress migrants beseae dane 
Germany titude. The great need appears to trian civilian, 1,200 calories a day, 
be the restoration of préperty and instead of the former ration of 
|_ (1) Tn_ 1938, according to the/ financial help so that they may 2,300 to 2,400 a day when they 
‘Census, there were in Germany| make a@ livelihood. Their lack of were treated as “persecuted per- 
499,682 persons of the Jewish faith, means adds greatly to their un-|sons.” In addition, however, they 
of whorn 400,935 were of German willingness to attempt fo stay in|continue to receive parcels of focd 
nationa‘ity. Between 1933 and 1941 Germany even when ‘they are from the American Jewish Joirt 
around ;300,000 persons were able among friends. Distribution Committee, which 
to emizrate to other countries, In Bavaria the German State amount at present to about 460 
though ‘nany must later have beeD| administrator for Jewish Affairs calories a day. 
overtaken as a result of the suC-\has a keen realization 6f the im-| (12) When there was constart 
cessive Nazi conquests. portant part played by the Jews in movement it was obviously easier 
(2) Tshere are now, according to|German commerce and. industry. for the military authorities to 
our information, about 74,000 Jew-| He made it clear that there was a transport the migrants in Es 
ish displaced persons, including|real intention to give ail possible on trains and trucks from Vienna, 
imigrants, in Berlin and the Amer- | encouragement to Jews to re-|since failure to supply transpo:t 


ican, British and French zones of | establish themselves. Uniess, how-| would not have stopped their prog- 
Germany.’ Of these, about 52,500 ever, greater opportunitits for em-|ress to the American zone of Ger~- 
are accmmodated in the centers,| ployment can soon be /found, it many. The new polity, however, 
the renjainder living outside. In|seems probable that few of the|seems to be right in reducing the 
the Bri‘ish zone, out of approxi-/German Jew? will wish to remain pressure upon certain areas and in 
mately 1,700 in centers, 9,000 are'in the country. \deterring Jews, unless there is 
at Hohre. In the American zone, , compelling reason to the contrary, 
they ar) distributed in a number|44stria ifrom complicating thé solution of 
of centers, of which our subcom-| (6) It ig estimated that when the problem by irregular move~- 
mittee visited nine, Hitler inyaded Austria’ in 1938 ment. 
(3) Gf the non-German Jewish|there were about 190,00¢ Jews re- Poland 
population, 85 per cent are Poles;|siding in the country. Excluding) i 
the remainder are mainly from the|displaced persons and migrants,| (13) With « pre-war Jewish 
Baltic ¢tates, Hungery and Ru-|there are now some 4,500:in Vienna| population of just under 10 per 
mania. | and an additional 2,500 in theicent of the total’, the Jews con- 
| (4) Ia addition ta displaced American, British and ee va poo cent of the in- 
Jews, there are about 20,000 native|20nes. abitants of the cities and towns 
Jews surviving in Germany. Evi- We were informed by: members/and only 3.2 per cent of the rural 
denen aria : of the Government that ft was the population. When Polend was par- 
‘a presented to us to show) : ‘ - 
|\Government's desire to réhabilitate|titioned in 1939, it is estimated 
that German Jews, freed from con-| i iithat the territ upled b 
centratiin camps or slave labor, |#!! Austrians on a basis of full|tha e territory occupied by tha 
are faced with great difficult in| equality and without discrimina-|Germans was inhabited by 2,042, 
finding & pl babe in the lite of | ton: and that the Gdvernment|000 Jews, while that which cama 
SS ee Soe welcomed Austrian Jdéws, like under Soviet rule contained 
the couhtry. Few of their COM~| sther persons, irrespective of re-| 1,309,000 
munities still survive. For exam-|i gion, who wished to ‘ake part; (14) We received conflicting in- 
ple, of & community of 4,500 init,’ the rebuilding of the country.|formation as to the extent of 
Stuttgart, only 178 remain, among|we were shown a letter addressed|active anti-Semitism. in Poland 
jwhom ate only two children. to the Government by a group/before the war. There is no doubt 
Jows Pound Still Apprehensive |PUMbering 1,000 Austrian Jews in that it existed and was accom- 
: i |Palestine and Egypt whio wished|panied by economic discrimination 
| While‘it is the firm policy of the to return. jagainst the Jews. 
military governments to eradicate) (7) Many of the Jews in Vienna| A document supplied to us by 
all forms of nazism, and priority|are in receipt of assistance. Thea Jewish organization, however, 
is given‘to Jews and to other per- economy of the country: wag dis-|states that before the war “Polish 
secuted versons in respect of hous-| rupted by the war and itd recovery| workers and most of the peasanta 
ing, footl, clothing, ete., the Ger-jig not facilitated by the division|generaliy refused to pay the anti- 
man Jews are still naturally ap-|o¢ such a small land into four zones|Semitic game and the workers in 
prehensive of the future wheniand Vienna into five sctors. It/particular often defended the Jews 
those Governments will no longer|seems probable that this division|against their assailants.” The de- 
jbe there, Anti-Semitism is tradi-\of control is partly responsible for velopment of nationalization, state 
jtional im Germany. In some Ger-\the delay in the promulgation of|enterprise and cooperative societies 
laws for the restitution of thejin Poland before the war not only 
property, without which it is most|led to the narrowing of what had 
difficult for Jews to re-establish|/been the normal field for Jewish 
that, now that the synagogues and/themselves. jactivity, but, owing to racial feel- 
all traces of Jewish life have been) Some anti-Semitism still exists ing and competition for a living, 
destroye‘l (only one rabbi survives|among the general populrtion. The led also to the gradual! elimination 
in all of Germany), no attemptifact that Jewirh displace’ persons of Jews from the industries taker 
should be made to recreate Jewish\are in receipt of highe> rations over. 
life and #0 give rise to the possibil-|than the surrounding population,| This in pre-war Poland resulted 
ity of a repetition of past events.|and that, for instance, at Bad Gas-|in an overcrowding of the profes 
(5) The Jews themselves feel/tein they are housed in some of the|sions and other occupations still 
that, most of their children having! best hotels, tends towards a local|open to private enterprise in which 
perished, their future in any case/feeling of hostility to them. This|the majority of Jews had been em- 
is dark. ‘The more highly educated, |is reflected upon Jews who are liv- ployed. 
particulerly some of the profes-|ing outside the centers. (15) We received a number of 
sional Jews with whom we talked, | (8) There are centers for Jew-|accounts of Polish participation is 
appeareé to have an interest in the|ish displaced persons in both the the German campaign of extermi- 
building: up of the communities,| American and the British zones of nation of the Jews. Intense Ger. 
and are willing to stay and help. (Austria. In the Ameriéan zone|/man propaganda was directed te 
We suypect that this movement there were in February! approxi-|inflaming the Poles against thers 
is develiping, but we recognize|mately 5,600 occupants and on the and it would indeed be remarkable 
that a few unfortunate incidents|first of April, 7,000. In the British) ——— ~ 
might wall ne oe something of|zone in February there vere 819, | tes religion 3118 tof ee 
& panic and induce a change of at-jand on the first of April, 1,019. | siticial esimete sous! i ce ant. 
|About 73 per cent of the 8,000 


‘ 


j;man cir¢les there is much shame 
and a désire to make recompense, 
but in thers there is a feeling 











tion 51.915 


cent ; 


s 


Continued on Following Page 





. 19 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


Report Describes the Condition of Jews on the Continent in a Country-to-Country Analysis 


ee 


and go to a country where they can|ported; a further 10,000 escaped|United States appears to be the|that of the other inhabitants of the|displaced persons and migrants./tion in matters affecting the Na-\the precise terms to be advanced 


Coptinesé Wrens Preceding Page be assured of sympathy and help. |to Hungary and 8,000 went intoj/first choice for immigration, butjcountry and their attitude toward/Tne majority of them have miade| tional Home. jfor the creation of a Jewish State, 
if it had been entirely without ef-| (21) In addition to the Polish/hiding or fought as partisans, of/as it is appreciated that under the/emigration appears to depend on},, .». way over the frontier into The mandate, toreover, re-|though they rejected the details of 
fect on some individuals. In view,/Jews now in Po'and, those Poles|whom 3,000 were killed. uired Great Britain to facilitate|/the Peel plan. The Arab leade 


existing laws large-scai¢ immigra-|their political outlook and not on i 4 t ’ 
however, of the strong opposition|and Polish Jews now in the U.S.8.R./. Eight thousand returned from|tion there is impossible, between|fears cf anti-Semitism of which no Italy and regard the country on ¥| Jewish immigration and to en-both in the Husseini-controil 
of the Poles to anything emanating|can, under an agreement entered |deportation, 10,000 from territories/50,000 and 60,000 Jews have ex-jevidence exists. It is thought that/a# “ point of departure for Pal-/courage close setticment on the)Arab Higher Committee and in the 
from the Germans, we doubt/into between the two Governments|restored by Hungary and 7,000/pressed a wish to go to Palestine./about 2,750 Jews wish to emigrate jestixe. land. Though extensive safe-|Nashashibi National Defense Party 
whether the propaganda did much|“withdraw from Sowet citizenship’ |from countries where they had |They feel that better opportunities|to Palestine and 550 or so to other} Gr Lece sards were provided for the non-|denounced partitien and reiterated 
more than keep existing anti-|and return to Poland, Some have/served as soldiers or in other ca-|exist for migration frorm military countries, chiefly to the United) . | ewish peoples, the mandate was their demands for independence. 
Semitism alive. lalready arrived and responsible of-| pacities so that with the 5,000 sur-|zones and consequently snany hun-|States. | (45) In Greece there are some framed primarily in the Jewish in-| In Great Britain the House of 
ficials declare that a further 800,-|vivors of partisan activity and|dreds of Hungarian Jews are still 10,000 Jews—-survivors of-a pre-|terest. Commons adopted a non-cormit- 


tal resolution, whdreby the Cabinet 


Jews’ Warsaw Fight Cited 000, including about 150,000 Jews, |those emerging from their hiding|outside of Hungary and many are|[taly ‘war, population of 75,000. Of the|, Even before the Palestine man- ; 
Except for the closing sentence,/are expected to come. places, there are now only 30,000;making their way into the Ameri- (42) The present Jewish popula- large st community of 56,000 at on soe Se pe = amy had somes eed ae ee Bye oP pet . 
. ’ eviden a e Arab. leaders in * : 


we think the position during the} It appears to be the general view |left of the original 135,000. Of|can occupied zones of Germany pears i 
war is stated with fair ecouracy Re the majority of the Jews re-|thig 30,000, only 24,000 now pro-|4nd Austria. my ob at Be to be in the region, 0 | Saleniiex, only, some 2,000 survive.|poiestine were not prepared readi- preliminary to the ting of a 
in the following quotation from the|turning will not wish to remain in|feas the Jewish faith. The balance,| (39) Wé received evidence that! jows with regard to whom no spe | DUNns the Nazi occupation the), +, acquiesce in'the creation of a/definite plan for stbmission to Par- 
document referred to above: Poland. Some, however, may settle|in the belief that it might saveboth in Rumania and Hungary) 14) problem arises. There are grett majority of vate | bape San Tourtens ational Home. Arab inde-|iament. : 

“In the defense of Warsaw andjin the lands taken over from Ger-\their lives, accepted conversion. it|Zionist organizations are active... 6500 non-Italian: Jews in the |Porird. & few) remained in t “= pendence was their demand. Riots; In its turn the Permanent Man- 
other cities the Jews partictpated|many, and we gathered that this is thought that most of them will,4nd that the movement westward)... principal cenfers in the south The ourveners ny | oay'nd scattered) surred in 1920 and 1921, and\dates Commission conceded that 
and fought side by side with the|woult be welcomed by the Polish|revert to Judaism, ls well ditected by thos» who re-|6 raiy under the administration qvek the country. |The largest com-/, >.» unrest spread. An effort to it would be desirable to exsmine 
Poles and a better understanding|Government, although it is stated| (30) Aga result of six years of °eived first-rate training in illegal),, UNRRA, and. in other rts | munities: are in Athens and-Sa- detine ths term “National Home” ® Plan of partition but opposes the 
between the two peoples seems to|that no obstacle is placed in the|Nazi education and propaganda|®ctivities during the war. Their inere bre further tee map Ml «rine Toniita. | nthe hobe of calming Arab fears ‘mmediate grant of in 
have been ptntnts during the Po-|path of Jews who wish to leave. and partly on account of fear of OT&@nizations have beer kept in- ing apout 5,500...An. additi mpricaenty gthete .is no-antis| snit-conciliating Arab opinion ap- 
lish campaign. However, it was| (22) In view of this information |having to restore to Jews property|t*t &nd now form part of the|)’ doo gion-Ithlian Jéws @re said tol. bre Peactically allijewiah | sred tg the Britists Government 
reported that when the Germans|and the possible departure of the|on which their livelihood may now|#ungarian and Rumanian Cen-)) oxisting precariously in varius |p chek Wad Rougact}oq. Nowdyer, to. be essential. 
first occupied the country some/majority of the 80,000 referred to|\depend, anti-Semitism and hostil- tral Jewish Committees, lpities. P r And: though | ation directed to & The ‘Churchill White. Paper of of Nations Council, acting on 16th 
Polish anti-Semitic groups collab-|in paragraph 16, up to 200,000 lity to Jews is evident. The licy On these committees the Zion-\" to! \center ‘at Banta) Maria di fest ytiqn ha ae Peat cult | 1242) theitefore, disclaimed the in- September, 1937, requested Great 
orated with the Nazis in their anti-|Jews may wish to leave the coun-|of the State in facilitatin — .|'sts appear to have the controlling}, | of the whole iMge Pees, Wits. Gev#ab ity uci féntion of creating a Jewish state Britain to carry out a study of the 
Jewish policies. This was limited|try and Poland consequently must erative enterprises meee tenn, > a. influence and non-Zionjst bodies y Shel rocked nT puree tin. P e, defined the Nationa] |*t#tus of Palestirie, concentrating 
to relatively smal] groups of young/be regarded as one of the chief|rout for Jews, no less than oth- 47 seem to oe the agg } ya summer nontation. Spe a Home tn | of-a gultiraily au-|O" % solution involving partition. 
people. * * * The majority of the| possible sources of mass migration./ers who were in retail business) 4 ; = ah errs em erever { es \ ed ere are atuté economic itzj,(nomoug: Jewish community, and Arab Disturbances Recalled 
Polish people refused penance Fey roy the re. —_— to gain a footing. The granting of pon aia fe 4h Sewdbehe vely . ot leultiog. yr. wish locked. fotward to the ultimate cré-} In Palestine thé brief period of 
i ere On ae ee ee Pore ee ene ee ioe |Dusiness licenses is often subject!tg remain. Funds for felief are paddy lacking |popwjation is in Htion of: 4 bisnationat but unitary peace which follo‘ved the publica- 
sie * When the Sows, tostag 2 dea-lin the Southwest, is facilitated by chee agra elena gs Bh ty, the American Jefijan if f * Ben & cuban lack rae toed or, oute tay witch Jewsltion of the Peel Report was suc 

’ + | guages and possession of capi- Ties be wiyen © out: mu a a- ‘ceeded by renewed Arab disturb- 
perate situation, decided to resist|the terrain and by the inadequacy jis) which the Jews cannot lag They pie Paiste the 5 ey imilar® = : Jewish: -imintgration |. og, culminating in the essas- 
the complete destruction of thejof frontier controls in territory! (31) There are many, particu- tral Comslittess in cack? countrill i spects. Mretoeptablished the! sation of the ‘Acting District 

F ot Commissioner for Galilee. This 





epencience 
to the new States which, it held, 
would need a riod of tytelage 
under mandate. Finally, the Léague 





ghettos with arms, the Polishionly lately brought under Polish larly in Slovakia, who wish to 
Tn d Mov t provided |administration. - and as the American J Joint)4 ; ; 
Sueur Gtk onpene. Theunente of 2 jemigrate. Zionism was always|Distributich »Committep cannot ting” Acton This state wad of ee oy campaign of violence repustes 
Jews according to reliable reports’ Relief Agency's Role Given on Yay ig and - ro oatimeted place any representatives east of ~ ee accepted: thug wathone mm in ‘a more vigorous government 
. e : . ‘ : that at the presen me per|y if tle, j | . : | 4 nd. . * | policy. ; 
have suck ceded in escaping the (23) UNRRA is operating in Po-'cent of the Jews wish to leave trp over dpeisbenpepaitine "ee ide s , al Deke Re* rece .| thisiasm, by the Jews, Dit was ree Fe soes Septeniber, 1987, regu- 
wns ont ‘ag = Tue peasumtslebeuen a cevida | toseption ‘cen see rumber is likely to diminish} ; “ee ¢ A al 7 he ed by the Arabs. Intions were issued allowing the 
towns and villages. The peasants allowed to provide reception cen-|if and when the restitution of prop- Bulgaria: ft re t 9 the ae. A rab sal toc rate result Government to detain political de- 
are reported to have hidden them ters, especially to assist those re-lerty enables them to.become es- (40) In Bul xin, comiibred with d rahe ns War. Jewint popil-|¢ in the abandonm t ofa plan to Term tat tue Galt of’ tum basal 
from the German executioners and turning from the U.8.S.R., much tablished. | othe mee A A ae rr D. It 4gn Ww. 33,000) * uceran elective eleinent into mpire, and authorizing the High 
a general feeling of solidarity with suffering would be prevented and| In the Czech provinces several Ida aw - , _ the of} bay, a. in ang'the centril.government. The yir'st Be ae ee, eee 
the Jews is prevailing throughout /perhaps a stabilizing influence in-|hundred young Jews organized in pardecutiel Mae res ad an tefugre ee want majorettempty to séttle the tony whose objectives he regarded 
Sena eatine, problem thug’ tailed: |i, contrary to pudlic policy. Haj 
: Te ew sano 


the country troduced ithe “Hechalutz,” which is # Zion-| ait 
The penalty for harboring a Jew, (24) In what was inevitably & jist organization for training young! : y : 4 th ‘2 hie| Aned-Jewlsh cooperation was notvAmin el-Husseini was removed 
= awd ‘om ud ean Le oumen $0 we oe cet persons for life in Palestine, are| 7 ed ‘a to ‘uis of the<lctnd ser herve" ong hy frof. the: leadership of the Su- 
ouse in which he was vere | o e work whic e Interna-|determined to go there. There are a - 7 ie - os iH le) : Ld bance ¢ and 
shot. jtional Red Cross in Warsaw is do-/200-300 cophene whose relatives; “?!@ ige ad alec - 2 yt , tendenc® tarl ’ Dist ur .° of 1929 Dockers Syent Conteuitinn the toent 
(16) It ts impossible to secure ing to trace the fate or where-|abroad desire to take care of them, |°%#!#tionjiconfiscation refitted m bar Z| 7 7. ee a] 1930 White Paper °» \Nefional Committees and the Arab 
accurate statistics in Poland today abouts of Poles and to supply in-|In Czechoslovakia the majority of | salee of pety and cB ; . W eo. S Bes t ¢ years between (929 and 1926 \Higher Committee were disbanded; 
but it is estimated that only 80,000 formation to inquirers at home orjof the survivors have during the|/@bpr —a ; ry "6: fs Pa eo Neheer -*  £ pwere ‘ongs of rela peace in five Arab leaders were deported to 
of the former Jewish population of | abroad, meager as it may often be.|Nazi persecution lost all their near! /°S!#!ation, : nd off ' Fa} why ee Pe an aw Pale tine. Th¢ Government. was the Seychelles and in fear of ar- 
3,351,000 are now there. In our) There is no special section for Jews relatives {postion no Subcdr Tasted ly inchrdlssge Sm WAR orkania P lamgely on the Crown rest Jamal el-Husveini fled te Sy- 
view, based on information ob-'but the work is largely concerned; (32) The Government-and leads | Wh that : ; © eat : “fash inlerca: 36 i Ap py Ti ~ wt @ résporgible|ria and Haj Amin el-Hussetni to 
tained from a number of widely with them. We feel that thisiers of intellectual movements arg | MPPhinery: # scr tebe « Marlales "0000, in, e GO00 ae “He 2 of British offi: Letianon. 
different sources, the vast ma-|merciful work is greatly handi-|repudiating fiercely the ideology|°! ProPeTly ‘B ry Lett rt early 2.000 cone: ant GaReNet: Undies theterras of the Relf:| In. November, °1937, military 
jority of this number now want to capped by the inadequacy of prem-jof anti-Semitism as tncompatibie| Th oe ( wa, (he tity Of) aatk is * pe , us Des Ordinance, the courts were established for the 
leave Poland, and will, if they can. |ises, equipment and staff. The Cen-|with the principles of a civilized! od ; ni “hy . | 9 th he ge Fest / igh Om raul ial 
(17) Their reasons for leaving tral Jewish Committee has a sim-jnation. In consequence, antis| Semitism 7 tee ' lal . arn wi 
are many and cogent. In our view jilar office. Semitism is likely to diminish, and 
it is not correct to say that at the’ (25) The existerice of an organi-|if this is accompanied by restitu- 
present time ‘a general feeling of|zation deliberately  facilitating/tion of property, we think tata 
solidarity with the Jews prevails emigration was not established,/considérable number, including : s 
throughout the country.” The con- but it seems probable that a kind|many who now profess a desire tg| thove ben rm Wich tn 1922 | Fille took pn the appearance of or- 
trary appears to be the case. In- of “grape vine” or underground|migrate, will decide to remain in ‘¢/Gove ~~ AT $5 4 e008 , Of whom ganized guerrilla fighters 
deed, there seems to be a very con-|system has come into existence|the country in which they were s¢/@"4_ ¢mbi ' “} , thet , , Ng ma « ar i r Gént Were| In July, 1938;'when the Palestine 
siderable measure of hostility|whereby the emigrating Jew is\deeply rooted. emigrate fake * ge te Ade tntnteenedieral’ Sa: te we pyeaseri by t® 260,000, |Governmeht seemed to have large- 
among the population toward the passed on from hand to hand on/p there is ~ * i | ; MOOreethiry 16epéer cent ly lost control of t 
umania: nant. ‘ } hed t gm ly lost control of the situation, the 
Jews. In a country ravaged by|the way out. We felt great con- : he ALD, weage in the/farpison was. strengthened from 
war, perhaps more so than anyjcern lest this migration increase} (33) We have been obliged ta have regi ; ’ pared highly | gypt, and in Septernber it was 
other, with its economy disrupted, /into an uncontrollable flood, lead-|base our report with regard ta Palestine, ; utepA ur p ag? a : ne Jeaders. further reinforced from Engiand 
the Jews and Poles are competi-|ing to much suffering and chaos in|these countries solely on documenta Ormstion » it appears ; ‘ae oe Taic = ‘ Arsh. Uataction The police w: laced under th 
‘whether they will be "af vg, E : 1 Oy oe a ated | gee Bh vagy flaca 
* Modified gpera tional contrel of the army 


tablished an trial cf offenses ccnnected with 
mon with Reference hts Suen a ne } ; i mapy Of the at: the carrying and discharge of fire- 
the prese é' .. a" he ih © te el ecneae ke. ” oe OF @ FPTisaUlonomous Kov- Arnis, sdtiotage and intimidation. 
munist Jews ie. ; Rere » marrit ne tha yy artim $71e: 4 Int on|Despite this, however, the Arab 
co t wey it int ; “4 15 wees eee TS ted #uch a sta- carpaign of murder and sabctage 

i . ; : pau Pp COgmse) idontinued and Arab gangs in the 


ewe @OEHRMS Fe RH eeu oO & 


I,” PUR & uw 


tors for a meager livelihood. |the countries of passage, but infor-|and on such. evidence as we were| HM t oat lana His , pdb, ; : 
able to obtain from outside their) “!/ites forjeavings®” = | rn am’ oven a . See Home of the,aonimander, and military officials 

+= oh 0 ale Th Ps Ouged iteelf in de-'gupersedéd the civil authorities in 

claim property that once belonged flow, The two main routes that|Jewish population of around 850,- 7 bg prs? - ane, , ‘bo A @ red +c ‘ do ithe| ous ek ola each a ate 
to them or deceased relatives, but were followed at the time of our|000. We were told that today,Jews in Yugos! 6 OOS aUeE ee a: i ae pa bnvdetst Which had Seoemeé bel st no 
the exercise of that right against| visit, both ending in the American|within the country’s present bor-|'t {8 esti YaAbre iene hat 2 & > x * Ghie @ieterbances, and in Oe noid wag réoccupied by the tréopn 
the Polish possessor is in itself & zone of Germany, were through|ders, there are 335,000—the largest Tem™in# y* 4 is : . - ” Paai White! By the end of the Ym sembIl: “ 
cause of hostility. Indeed, storie# Berlin and through Vienna, Linz| Jewish community in any European) 40e8 <. : - . ot ert. Ib feiterated the af crder had been restored in the 
were told of Jews being deterred and Salzburg. country. During the war all the e : ; tthe Pe ee ar but terrorigm continued in 


= 
we 


jared Den imation obtained since our visit in- 
Property Right Dec ated |dicates that thers has been at!borders. < Yugoslavia : ° 


The laws give Jewa the right to least a temporary reduction in the| (34) In 1939, Rumania had G1) offe 


Ve Gee 





| 


from claiming what was lawfully German racial laws were put int ) 
theirs by threats to their personal| France’ effect. Many thousand ot Jews urthill| rirél aréas until the outbreak of 


7 * (26) Before the war France had|“®re killed and most of those wha tion, The Woodhead Commission 


| f d fur-|the Secofid World War. 
(18) Throughout the country! survived were forced to do slave } ee ane ” eel cS oer 5 5 ie i? as mH. & ' fons 
; ;= :  ZABEES - ¥ ; a .. ) ' Preparations fo? the appoint- 


there is a high degree of lawless-|* Jewish population cf about 320,-| bor. Few retained ay. of their ; 
the ment of the technical commirsion 


f |000. It is estimated that there are 
Feat te Gate wnat It can|now about 180,000, Although about| Possessions. Their re-establishment : | 
. | 80,000 of these are mot French na-|2 the economic life of the country fid sequal‘? examine 'the details of a parti- 

“nikndate to tom scheme moved slowly. On 

afd denied #” Jantiary, 1938, the terms of 


by the passage of legislation to de- ‘tionals, the overwhelming majority|Presents great difficulties. For ex-} Country; ; ye 
Albania ..! al . 60 : ao fe ‘ Ra ae ahedito aafe- referefice Were published. They re- 


stroy anti-Semitism but, until the} ample, throughout the war Jewish 
_|are permanent residents now com-| 4 : 
rule of law is restored, the enforce: |ing within the refuges or diapinced YOU Teceived no technical instruc:}Atitrie i. ff : | Rolle, Hite Magri” Oye Coc the 
etis and tnetiectie persons categories. In February,|~ 0", 8nd the attitude of the non-~ o OF i 2 © of. om a * Rev g ee sah } the righ?  nob-Jewish| Wired the comminsion to recom- 
spasmodic and inetiective. ‘some 40,000 Jews ‘were in need of Jewish population is unfriendly... Belgium , ih. ..0h--+s >. ' ’ nd: wate re segon- | Mend for the’ proposed Arab and 
We have referred to the narrow- In November, 1945, 50 per cgntj Bulgaria °.)....4...”. ibs the pro- J@wish areas boundaries that would 


&Goenn 


7*«Vve 


. 
- 


; varying forms of relief largely! ©. 2 BO, BOs ~ . oe a ° : 
ing effect in pre-war Poland of supplied by the American Jewish | Rumanian Jews were unable ta}Czechosloyékia ¢..., 315, : - GUPROCE). wy Maginly ous; meIen. b galled for the estab- afford a prospect of the eventual 


nationalization and state enterprise || i+ Distribution Committee. The ™#ke & living and were receiving, Denmark®.;...-3. 7-4 @ TApO0%. ot aoe ee b. 2 an, Ce 9 ise a betes b Ot thé Natiohal some, It establishment of independent states 


on Jewish economy and there is a assistance from the American Jew-| Finland .-)....¢....% . ; 2 . and necegsitate the: inclusi 

danger that the present regime, |French Government provides some ish Joint Distribution Committee. Gotivany 2... a 215) 9s 600 | TOO Bellen: t dusters” ai Re intidied on the i dnailest number wr Arabe in the 
— preventing a returned out of the 120,000 de- The Government, we understand,} ¢°' * be : i i ¢ Bias S iB ‘ ‘ed ff 1022 | fewish area and of Jews in the 
ar as it can, may by its policy ported. sympathizes with the Jews and has Grétod he at 

ps 


i ‘ nent Was particularly Arab aren. 
in other fields restrict the area of |passed laws providing for the Tes d .iwA.b. Pe 450 vs | The Briti ; 
Another problem: is presented PY ltitution of eir properties and Hudeary % :  & p 400 ti the.ews, and the he British Government stated 


Jewish activity. There age many| w=, $093 z ithat, if a. scb t sti 
signs of inflation, few of expand-|‘he substantial uaner of orphaned |rights, but their enforcement meets} Italy 6 oS as BO, ote of fat mee Me it Meeinded te Pr: mayor 


Jewish children who are now be-| Ther yy 

ing private business. ‘with similar difficulties to those} | pcttian tii ; 
Jews occupy prominent positions /i"& cared oF nt ang tyne by\met elsewhere. The digposséssion by gy st Me ee = awny ge jae 2 Rage Speedy 2 
in the Government and a number Private eee ote end resent (of the present occupants from what| NOENBY «| ce ee wd thar |tétred to the Cotndll of the Lesgue 

are employed in the civil service = — Agatti France may be ttey have begun to regard as their) Rumania =. v., “t Ht a rt of Nations for consideration. — 
and police. This of itself appears/T™ UERCl tO end the right ee ;.\own homes and from the businesse YugoMavie 4... es % Pinte, The Woodhead | Commission ar- 
to be a cause of hostility toward|UnA> © 10 ee ee. At cant eam which they now depend for thei 4 i Bm ti ondi.| rived in Palestine late in April and 
the Jews, since responsibility for eees #8 vee senate difficult \livelihood encounters inevitable re4t, Total (Tible A) 6,015, ~ ” | remained intilvearly August. In 
unpopular actions of the Govern- S a heaton ae ref aeaaiie a sistance. ‘Enforcement of the-laws| | | y fie Pi aha deve November its report was published 
g perm which has commenced fs in itself i. ; = bg and She and revealed that pe plan of par- 

wi 


ment is attributed to them. redler 
(19) In addition there was the) a cause of hostility towards JeWs ir attempt to gettie the tition could be evalv thin. the 
: }terms Of réference which would, in 


elimination by the oa - a Czechoslovakia roan ~ ~% Holand, the protenennt + I Th : at . f HG ehh ; Cord br iter 
whole foundation of Jewish life and) ews in the Government and in the ‘tT j ¢ : H °F we Li , , a adage fet 
culture, confiscation of their funds| (27) Through Czechoslovakia police creates a certain Amount of Gounyy > | ! L v2 mality of B 44 Displac L Arat Revolt and Partition. ed pea of pos mwa Rnding 
and property, the destruction of/™ust pass the other main stream/hostile feeling againat the Jewish@nited Kingdom .. .’ i | BO,0% | ; 4 JermarantAustias: = i : bata Zrom SE fo 1936) success, The Pee! plan was re- 
their synagogues and the oblitera- of Jewish migrants on their way community. Wortugal . er ; 3,0 J 0) Deals ; aaterna) pre diestire| jictea ras phasible alterna- 
tion of their cemeteries. For Polish to Vienna. Before Munich the Jew-| (35) It is impossible for us tofSov . Unidg pe », rol i rian, Culgereand indystty tendell tives were considered. Plan B 
Jews there are so many reminders ish population of Czechoslovakia form any reliable estimate from 5P8 . - 4.000 ' Ae opt , yf ’ Anes niet al infest “and tart-/ would have reduced the size of the 
of their suffering and of the death totalled some 360,000. By Septem-'the information we have received ,2 4 - he eee 13d 8 into y Polish, 4 af jaidlaMew proposale-tor® partis lly Jowinh State by the addit " 
: ber, 1939, mainly as a result of\o¢ the number of J who. wish)” Fes a Soe or ‘ pte Bs isa” oy yao. cea So 
of. their relatives that to atart i ti th 7 om quitthin obec! number o ews | 0. wis 5 . te i . } 2 =, . ; : ro. S . : “4 if tive cOundil were Galilee to the permanently nman- 
again in Poland must indeed be a Munich boundaries pumbered Sethe on yan ll ay jeavestiu-p tal (Tible J) £8,930 f 833.080 2388 ; Pv... We Tiby, the” Administration dated ared and of the southern 
‘ ( r | ” 8 : f ‘Tes — ‘ ea “ _- ‘ < “ P . - : - e 
most formidable task. In the small 345,000, about 80,000 in Bohemia,|that many wish to dp #& In rod & Tint (Taple » cog i” hone 9525 nt , : Poot ge ae ge ets gs lige 4 vegies oe = = 
"> ana, 7 : ed ante : ' ! nh, to 


ees 


. 
tae 


bide R04) Wing mb pal 
‘ oar : * 
f f 


, 
. ° 
y 
: 
4 


*' 
~ & 





o-5 ARPT te AM OO & 
.* Cot Wee were PAR 


Oa s¢ebvisGeacaceea @ 


Rne-J io 


village of Lowicz there were for- ! 
merly about 3,000 Jews. Now there oy rey er wg Mer mt ge less affected by deporta- - ‘ . ea a0 ae ; oe |! . y 00 per-| have limited the Jewish State to 
are only twenty. This village is n0'159'509 in the Carpatho-Ukraine tions, a larger propoftion will ve \ ae «i rw, . ; Si oe Sh we ge ol ae of wi alm@s¢ 28 Der dent thie coastal region ketween Zikhron 
doubt typical of countless other : . 7? | senso wish to stay. Indeed, we} +7, tnt boi ee : “FY eaeti . Tet vy g, /Yaadev and Rehovoth, while north- 
villages and cities throughout Eu-| Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia eo — that oo oof country 037. ; weet Aveta yauas doe hae ; ers saga ; pleRaure sjowed itself eyn Palestine, including the Plains 
rope. | (28). From the Cucch-provinces|nestysmnay tnel wretiete to BSA ayia wer - ee gietieregarn ih 1936 in a general. steike'o¢ Esdraelon and. Jezreel, and ail 
i jready ‘made formal application for uo ; i . Buppert of <erfiands for self- 4 ‘ th 
Desire for Change Analyzed ‘perhaps an additional 10,000 suc-| Palestine certificates. . 4 — oe Abe y “ied bee toa > bition aon, pe —— of sou = 
Such a situation cannot fail to ceeded in po gontey oe the oae| Hungary . . OOULITTOR ' ; yt foes f _" > trang rap P eng aietetane a a —— 
be disheartening and distressing to 7 - = beter oe a eal . S 4 Ta tout O00. BATS f ba 4 ee ees ot 10 Tate. Ation.cf Jewish im-imembers of the ¢ommission fa- 
a returning Jew, often the sole ‘ne fate of many Bs pone 8 | (36) In the territory that is : i % mf Ry entaeee ter a! th trike was marked}yored Plan C, one favored Plan B, 
survivor of his family, The desire| ‘heir eye ge cea a “|Hungary today there were in 1939 . Se? Hee ol set atgct eB yy en high again brought!s.4 one declared ‘that no prac- 
must be intensely strong to pick bors left behind. Abou ’ nly about 400,000 Jews.” This was a the  UnhaE Ey , ti Paltatine protiem abarply tO pirabie scheme of partition could 
up the threads of life again else-' tered Ry epee von camps, OMY!country whose peopl¢ suffered se- é‘ ae ; , a uaerers tha. atten tic of e ='be devised ; 
where—where opportunities ap-'* rt ion ae cece ; have! rely, from deportations. It is Ps VAP Pm 3} : 2 oe meat. : . een a 
pear more favorable, where he will] siuened 2'500 = oo oe the estimated that there gre now abgut> = » a wt. ye, Zeng ARED, Xi wipe “Ro Commision which: The 1939 White Paper 
not be surrounded by a population) ntries in which they found|200/000 Jews, of whom 90 per cent 73 ‘ eof Urs AOC ee an % by St eto i v1 et (> investigate the) The British Government accom- 
inclined to resent his presence, and temporary refuge, many of them live in Budapest. 7 @ ¢ . af tplsfed that Asa? Hen Ahmad , a ; olay based i Mefied.the theory Of nenied the publication of the 
where he will not be perpetually '.. setters {a the Czechoslovak While some Jews bcecpy Gov- ye bd } s t ’ ehe bt . ; i 2 etieencaee Oblwrations toe Ardba &nd Woodhead Repert by a statement 
reminded of past events larmies. I'nere are ‘also 6,000-8,000 ernment positions and so e we ar . : , ¢ “Ube Sn+ § a, “~< ¥ , Fae | : . AA oe il 3s = ° AL. the. mandate of policy rejecting partition as im- 
(20) Before the war Zionism In'joy5 ¢rom the Sub-Carpathian _— one jrecting enue aS oe ; 4 if ty ; nt ab fs assixt (ni... t my athe Paleetiny repo Deactteable in the light of the 
0 was strong and a large!y, , market, o Pr = igmied | 2 > ‘ > ” : / ion? wy 
Poland g S°' Ukraine who regard themselves as vast majority is sho : eter pwn Nationals pgosting Peon gy pert dut 


number of Polish Jews migrated coechosiovek citizens, so that 4 \, Ameer xt e anil 
f lowing figures: in 19 ; ne ae the b 4 7" en Since the yht-dbhe ; 
red a ee ke > ey ; $3 4 et pet A ached the agreemen| might s’ill be possible. 
" teithe 


Ye UGh ee wae 


. 
' 


to Palestine.’ Political Zionism) ¢tpere are roughly 16,000 regiate 
with its demand for the creation Of) Jaws in Bohemia, Moravia and of all the Jews in ; : A |Ah invitation was’ therefore ex- 
a Jewish State is strong ®@Mongisijesia, It is estimated that in ad-|'" receipt of clothin ! a ) ' -» war po tee ' cil tended “to representatives of the 
the Jewish survivors. Accounts Ofidition there are probably 3,000- Jewish organizations} 4 a: £ mee Ms _ ' Aa a * é' ad e ahd iitet hé!paleatine Arabs, the neighboring 
life in Palestine given before the/4 000 unregistered Jews. received food; 66 perjiceft ntongy; Pews, | ; i 2 ; par Ot st. \ a (28 Bartitfon.)) an states and thé Jewish Agen- 
war are remembered and rendered! ' Following the liberation of the|*"4 14 per cent help toward pdy- alee x Retest ry to confer with the British Gov- 
doubly attractive by contrast with|country, all anti-Jewish laws and|ment of rent. Ther@ ig. no legal , ous oe ih) ee ' ' ot ; : ernment in: London, regarding fu- 
the ordeals they have endured.!decrees were voided. All compul-|‘iscrimination againg Bhem, bed Pidhod § ; t he -mnadyture policy in Palestine. 

Meg 1 ' rie at It was stated, however, that if 


These accounts are repeated nOWjsory transfers of Jewish property ( - 
Government decrees,” oa ie the Jorg. agreement could pot be reached 


Anplem 
and play their part in inducing the|were declared null and void under Inn J " ; YDS. 4 : 
who lost everything fave fecei¥éd) ; 4 po pased the.Gov t would 
r ii ; , on 6 ‘ , : yall . Christian: sovernment wo announce a 
ain | 


GeGtitvres en seuuh 


owing to the failure 


Jews to set out on the road to Ger-'a Presidential Decree of , § 
many, which is believed to lead to/1945, but the process of restitution| little by way of restitltipn: pdlicy of its own, ‘The Arab dele- 
Palestine. jis still in its initiel stages. Eco- at there : \gates refused to fneet with the 
Many Jewish organizations are|/nomic rehabilitatioa is. thus not|has heen a sharp fisa fh a -, ; Fao) SeReBence to Peel Report representatives of the Jews. Con- 
now operating in Poland and a'yet accomplished. Semitism. Propagand fs) this “di-| w : YALALT Bl o® on | . : 2s Me . wes published ferences between the Government 
Jew who is homeless wil] normally; Nevertheless, the Council of|rection has been cafried on i ” ) 1 . ‘ a the samejand the Jews on thé one hand and 
make contact with them, If he/Jewish Communitiés were confi-itwenty-five years and is still 1 ’ we f : . BAL Cir Government re-jthe Government and the Arabs on 
wishes to leave Poland he will in\dent that in ‘due course Jews|tinuing. Ifforts to tecdver p Tous Tb ew fh es & t of polfoy agree-\the other were, however, conduct- 
all likelihood be advised to express|would take their phace in the life/¢rty have the usual rep¢ x! : | ’ nd nt “9 clusiqis and pro-|ed bétween 7th February and 17th 
his preference for Palestine. Injof the Republic, and that as in-|Participation by. Jewg int wmnutneate rele . | ‘ ir Ba nosing m the Léngue of/Mareh. The Government submit- 
association with others it becomes|telligent and diligent people they|¢rnment and their mankee 5 Cty $0 & ; 4 : 0 =) atthe : éed.with|ted to both sides proposals sub- 
a fervent wish fervently expressed.| would be a useful and valuable ele-|the secret police caxlpe | ‘ , ; @ reception|stantially the same: as those con- 


But without propaganda or per-|ment in the community. reaction as in Poland | 


sonal influence, there are, as we! Slovakia: (37) All these factoré 


have indicated, sufficient reasons! ; detertoration of the colin 
for Jews to wish to leave Poland| (29) Of the 135.000 Slovakianjomy have led to 
ro 


Jews, some 40,006 had already/that only the tho 


Our information id 


~~ - = 


ee 


e 1p ls Was,\tained! in the White Paper issued 
@rally iinfayorable.|after the failure of the conference, 
via ‘Agency At once at-\but did not succesd in getting 
part as a breach of the agreement from either. 
Declaration whith. had} On 17th May, 1939, the British 

‘national Rome in the\Government published «a new 

estine, > latatement of policy. The 1939 

ever, both the Zionist| White Paper announced that the 

and, thé. Jewish/obligation to foster the creation of 
dmpted resolutions whichithe National Home: had been ful-. 

negotiations with the! j 
ih “Government f ascertain) Contirued on Foll..ing Page i 





A >> 


Jee meet te Puletine "Sere trom Deen lost to Hungary under the ilated, the older le 
Poland atten 2033, this percentage <ieclined | Vienna Arbitration in 1938. The — ee d 
ue to the increased immigration from Germany usual rigid anti-Jewish measures/ will wish to remain, thatpiato 
aed by Nazi th Durt the four) i 
years 1896 through 1939 German and Austrian Were introduced during the war.|30,000-40,000, or less than. 
crake te Ike envliee ‘period. inctessed’ from |Five thousand more Jews managed|cent of the Jewish population. 
30 to ST per cent of the total.” The proportion to leave the country and ofthe re-| (38) Aa in Poland, he chief de-|clud 


olish to total Jew f declined ‘ q 
Seon ah to tk pee cont mmisrants declines maining 90,000, 72,000 were de-|sire seems to be to getjoyt. The| Aral 


CerAA te BHAA esSsUACKELESCKRS RSE 


i eta wee Be fae 


. | 
. * 
*.-@ 





20 


Committee 


Continued From Preceding Page 


filled, and that Palestine with its 
existing popuiation was to be pre- 
pared for self-government. The 
Government, stated the White 
Paper, regarded it as contrary to 
their obligations to the Arabs that 
the Arab population should be 
made subjects of a Jewish State 
against their will, and had on their 
objective to foster the creation of 
an independent state in which 
Jews and Arabs could share au- 
thority. 

In development of theses ideas, 
the White Paper announced a plan 
for constitutional progress which, 
it was hoped, would permit the 
creation of such a étate within ten 
years. During the first five years, 
Palestinians would replace British 
officials at the head of all depart- 


L 


Di Public Security Proble 
] y ve r a2: m 
eligible as immigvants under the/smallest but the most extreme of |sult of the formation’ of» the 
White Paper. Further immigration|the Jewish secret bodies. Refus<|League wap thé establiahment of 
beyond 1 was to be dependent/ing cooperation of any sort with Arab Offides in Washington, Lon- 
upon Arab agreement. the Mandatory, its members en- donl dnd Jetusafam to si teri 
Illegal Immigration gaged throughout the war in ape; 4 Sea’ et ia 
ries of outrages culminating in the |te?# for the dissemination ¢f- in- 
Many Jews, flezing from anti-jattempted assassination of the|formation concerning Arab: inter- 
Semitism in central and eastern|High Commissioner in August./ests and objectives. , « 
Europe, and finding |the gates of/1944, and in the murder of Lord Fimally, te November, 1945, a 
Palestine closed, sought entry into|/Moyne in Cairo on 6th November/new Arab Higher Committe, rep- 
nolomgn * : vor gh FE ptitiousiof that year. resenting all the Arab parties of 
. Ile on grew ine, 
to unprecedented proportions. To|Atab Political Developments |Falestine, ee 2 ae 
meet this threat the Palestine Gov-| In 1945 the Arabs also began tojand return to estine early in 
ernment continued its standingjconsider the political future. De-|1946, Jamal ebHussejni became 
procedure of the immi-imands were made for the release|the leader, A reorginizatian of this 
gration tas by the number of/of Jamal el-Husseini, who had been|body under Jamal ¢l-Bldsseini’s 
illegal entrants either apprehended|interned in Southern Rhodesia fol-|guidance gave rise in late March, 
or estimated to have entered the his capture in 1941 while|1946, to c es of high-handed 
country. seek to escape southward fromiand dictatorial methods from some 
This, however, appeared &/Teheran in the aftermath of thelof the non-Husseini factions. De- 
scarcely adequate method of cop-|Rashid Ali revolt in Iraq. Abortive|spite internal friction, however, 
ing with the problem, and in 1940/attempts were made to organize althe Arab leaders in Palestine are 
ments of Government; if public|4rastic efforts were made to halt/center for united Arab polftical ex-junited behind a program demand- 
opmion was favorable, a legisiative| further unlawful entry. The policy|pression in Palestine. In the fol-jing the fulfillmant of the White 
body would be created. At the end/of reducing the immigration quotas stew year the Arab leader se-|Paper policy and the speedy grant: 
of this period an elected assembly|W&s. augmented by a threat to de-|lected a politically neutral repre-jing of independence to an Arab- 
would be convened to make recom-/ Port to some British colony andisentative, Musa Effendi el-Alami,\dominated Palestine. 
mendations concerning the consti-|to intern there for the duration of|to attend the conferences in Egypt| Arabs as well as Jews possess 
tution of the new state. If at the the war any persons entering Pal-jwhich led to the formation of the/arms, and signs have not been en: 
enti of ten years, eircumstances|estine without proper qualifica-| Arab League. tirely lacking of a revival of Arab 
required a postponement of ——Pmy The attempt to implement! ‘ gince the Asa} League was com- secret activi 
pendence, the British Government /this policy resulte¢ in: the Patria) posed of independent States, Pales-|which preceded the disturbances of 
would consult with the people of | disaster. In November, 1940, @ ves-|tine’s position in relation to it was 1936-30. 
Palestine, the Council of the) sel loaded with deportees was scut-inot easy to define. It was settled| In the face of actual violence 
L2ague of Nations and the neigh-|tled in Haifa Harbor by Jewish|py means of an annex to the Arabland threats of much more serious 
bering Arab states. )sympathizers, with loss of life to Covenant, declaring that/violence, possibly approaching the 
The White Paper also announced | 252 persons. Some 1,350 illegal im-|“owing to the peculiar circum-|status of civil war, the Palestine 
that Jewish immigration could no/migrants were, nevertheless, sent/stances of Palestine and until that|Government resorted to drastic 
longer be fostered in the face of}to Mauritius in December, 1940. country enjoys effective independ-|emergency jegisiation which per- 
continued Arab opposition, but de-| As the war engulfed Europe, the/ence, the Council of the League mitted it to modify or suspend nor- 
clared that, in view of the fact/opportunities for movements Of should undertake the selection of|mal civil liberties. There can be 
that the economic life of Pales-/people, whether legal immigrants/an arab delegate from Palestine to| no gainsaying that Palestine today 
tine was adjusted to the reception|or not, became less, and in the | narticipate in its work.” is governed without the consent of 
of large numbers of immigrants, autumn of 1943 it was found that! 7, mber, 1945, the states|\Jews or Arabs by an Administra- 
and out of consideration for the|only some 44,000 of the 75,000 per-| embers of the League undertook |tion depending almost solely upon 
plight of Jewish refugees from/sons provided for in the White Pe-|to boycott the products of Jewish|force for the maintenance of a pre- 
areas of persecution, the Govern-|per had reached Palestine. The|inqustry in Palestine. Another re-\carious authorit 
ment planned to admit A se Palestine | British Coe en a Ai 
75,000 persons during the succeed-|nounced on ovem a 
ing five years, subject to the cri-|the time limit of th» White Paper APPENDIX V 
terion of economic absorptive|/would not »be enforced but that, Palestine: Public Security 
The Present State of pense b Soria ted Fyre an inde- 
penden a April of that 
Public Security to three days of rioting in 
In Palestine there is a police| Jerusalem, in. which Arab mobs fell 


capacity. Finally, the Paper au-|subject to economic absorptive 
thorized the Government to place|capacity, an additional 31,000 Jews 

jand prisons establishment of over|upon Jews with aticks, stones and 
|15,000 persons, exclusive of super-| knives. 








restrictions upon the purchase of| would be permitted to enter Pales- 
land by Jews. tine. 

The Jews unanimously con-| Restricted legal immigration, 
demned the 1939 White Paper as &/therefore, continued on this 
violation of the mandate, which/unti] the end of 1945. Since then 
would place the Jews in a perma-|:mmigration hag been maintain 
ment minority status in a hostile/at the rate of 1,500 persons 
Arab state. Jewish viclence broke|month, pending the report of th 
out in Palestine, and Jewish organ-| Anglo-American Committee of In-| 
izations throughout the world is-|quiry. 
sued the most vigorous protests.| With the end of the war in 


2| 


habitually armed and are conspicu-|in the riots.. British troops were 
ous everywhere. Throughout the called out, the police were dis- 
country there are over sixty sub-|armed and order was finally re- 
stantially built police barracks,/established. As a result of these 


‘capable of being defended as forts|disturbances, five Jews and four 


The Arab leaders, too, rejected the /murope a revival of illegal immi-| 
White Paper at first on the ground tion occurred as the displaced | 
that it denied them immediate in-| Jews of Europe sought refuge in 
dependence. Soon, however, the/the National Home. Even as the) 
Nashashibi faction agreed to CO-'(ommittee was preparing to leave 


tary force stationed in Palestine and twenty-one Arabs were wound- 
which is the equivalent of two and ed. 
a half divisions, and in addition| The opening of Palestine to Jew- 
‘there are a number of Air Force|ish immigration late in 1930 con- 


es, similar to. those 


The Arab police either 
jnumerary police. These police are|idopted a passive attitude or joined) 


in an emergency. There is a mili-/Arabs were killed and 211 Jews) 


Caused by ‘Apali-lewish ‘Rivalry 


4 ° ¢ ‘ ¢ “ 

inst Jewish immigration andjcent, Armed to some a 

d trinsfets. Soon the Arabs fe-/thouzh not organized, they consti- 

pay tute,’ however, a ‘potential threat 

Arab Hi to internal security. Recent politi- in Haifa, caus- 

“© Fo to thé Govern-|cal and other developments ing police casualties, and on the 

ty its members could not|size danger. In NovVember,/26th February the income tax of- 

ir influence to check what/1945, a new Arab Higher Commit-jfices at Jerusalem, Hesifa and 

they regarded as 4 spontaneous/tee tas formed, announcing that/Tel Aviv were seriously damaged 
expression of national feeling. its parpdse was “th annie respore-|by bombs. 

“During May and June'the Arab |sibility for paliticnl and national| During March there were iso- 
strike was made effective through| affairs in the narme of the Arabjlated murilers of poticemen, and 
persuasion and intimidation. Jaffalpepuiation of tine.” In a@jon the 24d eight British police- 
port whs closed. There was de-|wider: field the Arab League came|men .were murdered by 
struction of Jewish property andjinto being in| March, 1945. Thelafid bombs, and serious damage 
shiping: at Jewish seitiements,| Palestine Arabs naw rely upon the|was done fo police buildings in the 

¢ attacks were made on the|Leagie to represent their interest}four major towns. Following these 
railway linés; were barri-|polititally, and it may be assumed/last attacks curfews were imposed 
eaded and telephone. wires were) that, in event of conflict, they|and the death penalty was reintro- 
eut. Arined bands, reinfotced fram|woulé look t the neighboring/duced for the carrying of arms 
Syria and Iraq, appeared in the|Atab:States for armed assistance,|and other crimes. On the 17th May 
hills. In the following moriths|On the 24th March, 1945, « large/the Ramallah broadcasting station 
these bends increased in. strength|party of Jews hiking in the area/was attacked and an abortive at- 
and were organized under the lead-| west >f the Dead Sea was attacked|tempt was made to broadcast 
érship of Fawzi ed-Din el-Kauw-|by a;med Arabs, one.Jew being|therefrom. On the 14th July the 
akji. Sabotage and murder of Jews killed: and three wounded. During}district lice headquarters and 
intrease4. The oil pipeline running} Atgust and Septeniber, 1945, there district d registry offices at 
to Haifa was Fenedtedly daeturdt was > revival of Arab clubs and/Jerusalem were attacked and se- 
Roads were systematically mined|sovieties such as had played ajverely damaged by explosives and 


and railway tracks were 
ly owards the middle 


were shot dead in the streets of 
Haifa. On the 24fh February 
lence in- Sag ns occtirred in po- 


ler Cor- 


, and 


ttep 
t 
use th 


furtherance of the Arab rebellion,|flicted and the land registry rec- 
Sin¢e 1939, however, the imme-/ords were destroyed. 
diate ; threats to public security| On the 8th August an attempt 
have pome from the Jews protest-|was made by Jewish terrorists to 
ing ayainsat the pdlicy which assassinate the High Commis- 
Mandatory laid down in the White|sioner while he and Lady Mc- 
Paper: of that yeat. In February,|Michael were proceeding by car to 
1939, when rumors were current|a municipal farewell function at 
that “he British Government in-|Jaffa. A fine of L. P. 500 was 
tended to grant ow to anjsubsequently ptaced on the Jewish 
Arab-‘lominated estine, therejsettlement of Givat Shaul for fail- 
were ‘bomb outrages throughout/ing to assist the police who in- 
the céuntry in which thirty-eight\vestigated the crime. On the 22d 
Arabsi were killed and forty-four|/August three police buildings in 
wounded. The loig-present problem|Jaffa and Tel Aviv were attacked 
of illeyal Jewish immigration was| with loss of police lives. 
also ii#ttensified. On the 17th May,| On the 27th September four po- 
tion was mad¢. Sniping, sabotage simultaneously with the issue of lice stations were attacked with 
and assaults continued. the White Paper, transmission|some casualties to the Palestine 
After a lull, whilo the Royal iines were cut, the headquarters|police personnel, and on the.29th 
Commission was in Palestine andio¢ thé Department of Migration|September a senior police officer 
during which the military garrison|was s#t on fire, and Government/was assassinated on the way to 
was reduced, public security again/oftices at Tel-Aviv were sacked./his office. On the Sth October the 
deteriorated. During the first five\On the next day in Jerusalem/Tel Aviv offices and stores of the 
months of 1937 lawlessness was|shops were looted, the police were|Department of Light Industries 
generally confined to the north and/stoned.and a British constable was\were raided, and textiles valued 
to the Jerusalom ares, but on the|killed. In the following week alat L. P. 100,000 were removed. On 
13th Jun of that year an unsuc-jcampaign of attacks by Jews on|the 6th November this wave of 
cegsful attempt was made on the Arabs, and the Government waSs'terrorism culminated in the mur- 
life of the Inspector General of|begun,:and with a short lull during|der in Cairo by two members of 
Police and from that time a cam-|the sejond half of July this con-\the Stern group of Lord Moyne, 


damaged. T 

iof August a few acts of retaliation, 
committed by Jews against the ad- 
vice of their ble leaders. 
began to occur. the following 
month extensive operations against 
the Arab gangs by an augmented 
military forc® were commenced, 
but wheh on the 11th October the 
stftike was called off by the Arab 
Higher ‘Committee, the British 
armed forces: were not used to 
their full capacity, The rebels in 
the hills.were in many cases per- 
mitted to disperse. No effective 
effort to disatm the Aral popuila- 


’ 


| 


/paign of murder, intimidation and/tinued until the outbreak of the/the British Minister Resident in 

jeahotage conducted by Arab law- wat. Time dome, tovlated rs the Middle East. 

\breakars became widespread andiders, “nd sabotage o ephone 

loccasionally provoked retaliatory|services, the Palestine broadcast- Appeal Made to Community 
ing. station and police launches| On the 10th October, before the 


jacts ry. Jews, On the 26th Septem-| 

ber, 1937, the Acting District Com-|were the main features of this/assassination of Lord Moyna the 
missioner. of the Galilee District campaign. With the outbreak of|Officer Administering the Govern- 
and his police escort were mur-|the war, however, the Jews unani-/ment of Palestine and the Com- 
dered at Nazareth by Arabs, De-|mously agreed to put aside their/mander in Chief, Middle East, had 
spite a stronger Government pol-|‘iffereaces with the British policy.|issued a joint official communiqué 
Jewish’ terrorist action ceased/in which it was clearly stated that 


shooting | 


uent-|Prom‘nent part.in 1936-1938 in the|fire; police casualties were in- 


| vernber, 


operate with the Government in 


the Middle East, two boatloads of 


junits and also certain naval forces tributed to a new outbreak of vio-| 


giving effect to its terms, and as 
time passed the majority of Arabs) 

e to accept it as fulfilling, if 
properly implemented, their main 
demands. ' 


Parliament’s Approval Gained 


Despite the hostile reception) 
given the White Paper, and in face) 
of vigorous attacks upon it in Par- 
Hament, the British Government | 
succeeded in securing Parliament- 
ary approval of their policy and) 
presented it for consideration by| war effort, and agreed to lay asid 
the P a een tee — their manny oe Baer 5 yt rae we 
mission. The Commisso “|tory. Even onist extremists, 
mously held that the White Paper|the ‘Revisionists, gave up for 
Ps 

on Ww -| 
ment, with the concurrence of the White A won a 
organs of the League, had put upon) ~The Jewish Agency offered its) 
= — 1 een the policy |arvices in the recrutimen a - 

@ members reco wish wun 
was not in harmony with the terms col. in Peiestana, “end, when this 
of the mandate, while the other|,oo.. was rejected, ‘the Agency 
three held that existing circum- P led to organiza the recruit- 
am te pg nee pA — policy, ing of Jews in response to the calls 
Pe Nats an oak it jof the Army, Air Force and Navy, 
7 pthcemttare | Eeocenen pre-|While at the same tiine maintain- 
pared to iay its plans before thei oe cat Gon the ae Bn py > 
council in September, 1939, but the all speci 4 

y Jewish military force, a cam 
outbreak of the second —— War paign which was. finally crowned 
resulted in the suspension o 
League of Nations activities, ana|With success in September, 1944. 

lwhen a Jewish Brigade Group was 


yell decision on Palestine established. According to official 


In Palestine, wartime conditions ‘sures, Jewish recruitment in Pal- 


lestine for all types of military 
and Jewish and Arab rejection of |** ’ 
its terms made it impossible fully/%¢Tvice, both combatant and non 


to implement the White Paper.|Combatant, between 1939 and 1946 
The constitutional changes sug-|"e®ched a total of 27,028. 

gested were never put into effect; [The Arabs and the War 
instead, the Palestine ee. 
continued to operate upon 
Crown Colony pattern. Palestin-|tine, though showing few signs of 
jang were not promo 
Departments of the 
tion, in which the res 
cials like the mem 


illegal immigrants were appre- 
hended off the coast of Palestine. 
Attempts of the authorities to ap- 
prehend illegal immigrants have 
met the most determined resist- 
ance both from individual Jews and 
from secret Jewish organizations. 


Jewish War Effort 


With the outbreak of the Second 
World War, the Jewish Agency 
and the Jewish community in Pal- 


estine offered their support to the 
e 


| 
| 
| 


} 








| 


| 


} 


| 
| 





Administra-|slight response to Axis propa- 
nsible offi-|ganda, showed itself large! 


rs of the/ferent to the outcome of war. 


Executive and Advisory Councils Out of a population twice as large|carrying of arms and explosives, lost football, and his funeral be-|had becom® thoroughly organized. !ng 


remained wholly British, as did/as the Jewish, only 17,445 persons 
those on the district level. |were recruited for military service, 

Even in the local affairs, the ad-|4 figure less than half the Jewish 
vance of self-government has been total. The flight of the Mufti, Haj| 
extremely slow. There are pro-|Arnin el-Husseini, te Italy and) 
vided for in Palestine today 24\Germany, and his active support 
elected municipal councils, 38 of the Axis, did not lose for him 
elected loca! councils, and 24 more his, following, and he is probably 
or less popularly chosen village|the most popular Areb leader in 
councils, but the powers entrusted | Palestine today. 


to these bodies are in most ca8°5 Conflict Between the 


slight, and the most recent 934.| 
nicipal elections took place in 1934. Administration and the Jews, 


Demands for a greater voice in) 
government come from both the the Illegal Army 
Arab and the Jewish communities. 


Methods of Land Transfer 


Unlike the constitutional pro- 
visions, the land transfer policy of 
the White Paper was speedily im- 
plemented. Land Transfers Regu- 
lations, published on 28th Febru- 
ary, 1940, divided Palestine into 
three zones. 

In Zone A, consisting of about 63 
per cent of the country including 
the stony hills, land transfers save 
to a Palestinian Arab were in gen- 
eral forbidden. In Zone B, consist- 
ing of about 32 per cent of the 
country, transfers from a Palestin- 
ian Arab save to another Palestin- 
ian Arab were severely restricted 
at the discretion of the High Com- 


missioner. In the remainder of Pal- 
estine, consisting of about 5 per came the concern of an increasing 


cent of the country—which, how-|number of persons within the Jew-| 
ever, includes the most fertile/!#h community. 
areas—land sales remained unre-| Hagana, a development from the 
stricted. earlier Jewish defense organiza- 
This legislation has been bitterly tions against Arab terrorism, has 
denounced by the Jews on the/STown into a military organization 
ground that it violates the man-|°f over 60,000 persons, fairly well 
date both by ignoring the provi-/@fmed and disciplined, and control- 
sions for fostering close settlement ling its own secret radio transmit- 
on the land, and by establishing a/ter. Though it has in genera) ex- 
form of “racial” discrimination.|¢rcised a policy of restraint an 
The Arabs have, on political|Tefrained from acts of terrorism, 
grounds, generaily favored the reg-|!t was implicated in the Jewish 
ulations, and indeed have demand-|violence at the end of 1945 direct- 
ed a more regid enforcement de-jed the Government's ef- 
spite the fact that they have the/forts to prevent illegal immigra- 
economic effect of preventing the|tion. 
fiow of Jewish capital into Arab| Teh Irgun Zval Leumi, the se- | 
lands for use in agricultural or|cret military organization of the) 
industrial development. 


artial implementation of the) 
ite Paper policy progressed, 
Jewish resistance became more ac- 
tive. The diametric opposition be- 
tween the objectives of the Zion- 
|Program and the policy of the! 
|Mandatory Administration under 
j|the White Paper led to constantly 
increasing friction between the 
Jewish organizations in Palestine 
and the Government, and encour- 
jaged on the part of Jewish youth 
jand extremists an ever more fre- 
|quent resort to violence as a means 
both of protest and sabotage. 
Military preparedness for a pos- 
sible recourse to arms in defense 
of the Jewish National Home be- 


| 





} 





ists as expressed in the Biltmore 554 


‘ciple of group responsibility 


lence. 


en ed in coastal trol and 
sy Ps mobs attacked Jewish residents of 


other duties. In 1944-1945 over 
L. P. 4,600,000 was spent by the 
Palestine Government on law and 
order, as, opposed to less than L. P. 


|migration Center, killing thirteen 
persons, Again the military forces 


5,600,000 on all other government- ad to be summoned to replace the 
al services not directly attribut- Unreliable Arab police. e dis- 
able to Palestine’s part in the orders, however, spread, On the 
waging of the Second World War. |34_ May Hebrew colonies at Kafr 

e Government, in an effort to 58a and Ain Hai were looted. On 
preserve order, has assumed ex-|the 5th May the village of Petah 
tensive emergency powers under | Tavah was attached by several 
euthority of the Falestine Datense | wiiitary formation, and-Wad saved 

rder-in-Council o . Emer-| . 
gency regulations, going back un-|{'0™ destruction only by the ar- 
der this and previous authoriza.| 
tions to 1936, have granted ex-! 
traordinary powers to the govern- 
ment and the military authorities) 
and have severely restricted the, 
liberty of the individual. 

In 1936, when the Arab revolt’ 
was assuming serious proportions, 
the government enacted regula- 
tions authorizing the seizure and 
et ee My road trans-| The period from 1921 to 1928 
0d ’ Ma mney of curfews, was in general one of peace in 
'~ vtathe e ¢ 4 ; Lng the palestine. Jewish immigration was 

- | peivit undesirables, and relatively slight and the Arab na- 
un -- privileges of arrest and tionalist movement was ill organ- 
eS ae ae Stloctive super:| zed and divided within itself, In 
vision of political suspects. Dras-|e however, a quarrel developed 


|between Jews and Arabs over the 
tic regulations were issued impos- Wailing Wall in Jerusalem, ground 
ing collective fines as punishments 


holy alike to Moslems and Jews, 
upon areas where unidentifiable|and inter-community tension in- 
inhabitants had committed a crime. creased as the months passed. Jew- 
In 1937, regulations were enact-|ish immigration seemed likely to 
ed allowing the government to de-|increase and the 
tain political de in any part)ment was being strengthened in 
of the British Empire and author-|furope and America. Arab polit- 
izing the High Commissioner tolical activity revived. On the 15th 





rival of several squadrons of cav- 
alry. On the 6th May, Arabs be- 
sieged Haderah and attempted an 
attack on Rehovoth. In these dis- 
orders forty-seven Jews were killed 
and 146 wounded, mostly by Arabs, 
and forty-eight Arabs were killed 
and seventy-three wounded, mostly 
by police and military action. 


Seven Years of Peace 


outlaw associations whose objec-| August, 1929, a Jewish demonstra- 


The Arab community in Pales-|tives he regarded as contrary to'tion was held at the Wailing Wall,|caused the death of seventy-fou 


public policy. Military courts were and on the following day the Arabs 


ted to head/actual disaffection and offering) established for the trial of offenses'held a counter-demonstration. On others. 


connected with sabotage and in-|the 17th August a young Jew was 


indif-|timidation, and with the discharge|stabbed to death by an Arab into|committed by Jewish extremists. 


of firearms at persons and the whose garden he had followed a 


both of which offenses were made|came the occasion for a serious 
punishable by death. In 1938 and/anti-Arab demonstration. 

1939, 908 cases were tried by these| On the 23rd August Arabs armed 
military courts and 109 death sen-|with knives and clubs invaded the 
tences were confirmed. new city of Jerusalem and began 


& massacre of the Jews. On the 
Emergency Orders Cited following day more than sixty Jews 


Recently, in the face of Jewish were killed at Hebron, and in the, 


threats to public security, the|succeeding days a number of Jew- 
Government has again had exten- ish colonies were attacked. The 
sive resort to emergency regula-| police had to open fire to prevent 
tions, some of them already exist-|outrages in Neblus and Jaffa, and 
ent and some of them newly issued Arabs attacked the Jewish quarter 
and revised in 1945 and 1946. Or-/in Safad, killing or wounding forty- 


ders of detention may be issued five persons. In all, 133 Jews were 


As the war proceeded, and the against any citizen on the author- killed and 339 wounded, and six | 


ity of an Area Commander, and/Jewish colonies were destroyed. 

these orders are not reviewable|There were 116 reported Arab 

deaths, many of them as a result 
lice and military activities, 


by any court of law. Late in| 
December, 1945, the number of of 

e@ period between 1929 and 
|1986 was marked by periodic vio- 


Jews heid in detention stood at 
lence. In August, 1930, there was 


a minor Arab outbreak at Nablus. 


| 


The High Commissioner's power 
to deport: detained persons was 
exercised in October, 1944, to de-/The years 1930 and 1931 saw a 


\port 251 Jews to Eritrea, and in|Series of terrorist murders of Jews, |military operations had reduced edge of :military matters, inclu 


December, 1945, to send fifty-five Agrarian crime was endemic and 
additional Jews to the same des-|the Arabs attempted to take into 
tination. The regulations confer|their own hands the prevention of 
on the authorities wide powers of illegal Jewish immigration. In Oc- 
arrest and search without warrant.|tober, 1931, Arab demonstrations 
Searches may be made in the ab-|and riots directed against the 
sence of the owner or occupier,|Government, as well as against the 
provided the mukhtar of the area Jews, took place in Jerusalem, 
or two responsible citizens are pres-|Jaffa, Haifa and Nablus. In the 
ent. Military courts possess con-|course of these and related inci- 
siderable jurisdiction and ean im-|dents twenty-four civilians were 
pose the death sentence. The prin-|killed and 204 wounded. In No- 
has| vember, 1935, an Arab armed gang 
been extended, and the authorities|\was discovered and liquidated by 
are empowered to impose collec-| police action. 

tive fines as punitive measures. | 
The regulations provide also for 
forfeiture of property by any 


of the High Commissioner, has|sales to the Jews, and the grant 
committed or abetted the commis-|of independence were ushered in 
sion of certain specified offenses. |on the 15th April, 1936, when a 


d of Arab highwaymen held 
The Background of up ten automobiles on the Tulk- 
Violence 


arm-Nabius road and robbed their 
passengers, killing two persons, 
During the early years of the|who oan were selected for 
Mandatory regime in Palestine! death 
threats to public order camejthe following night two 


use they were Jews. On 
Arabs 
largely from the Arabs, protesting) were murdered near Petah Tiqvah. 


On May Day, 1921, Arab 
Jaffa and stormed the Zionist Im-| 


icy; which involved the disbanding 
of the Arab Higher Committee, the 
jarrest of some of its leaders and 
the institution of military courts, 


in size, and assassinations, espe- 
cially of police personnel, Govern- 
ment officials and moderate Arabs 
jin prominent positions increased, 


Arab gangs in the hills increased|“®* © 


as did sabotage of the oil pipeline|ish strike followed by a week o 


completely for a time and an illegal) the terrorists and “their active and 
broadcasting station which had/passive sympathizers are directly 
been oberating for some months|impeding the war effort of Great 
Issed down. Britain” and “assisting the enemy.” 
cewish Strike of 1940 The communiqué called gos Aly n 

Jewish community as a whole to 

The :publication of the Land 

Transfers Regulations late in Feb-|% their utmost to assist the forces 


of law and order in eradicating 
ruary, +940, evoked s general 1 of|this evil thing within their midst” 


and added that “verbal condemna- 


of mortars was found at 
the saluting box from which 

Gort, then High Commissioner, 
would take the salute at the pa- 


rade. 

On the 17th June, substantial 
quantities of gelignite were stolen 
by armed Jews from quarries, and 
on the 13th July a lorry load of 
explosives wag ambushed and the 
British constable escort was killed, 
[On the same day a bridge on the 
Haifa-Kantara railway line was 
iblown up. On the 7th August, 
£. FP. 3,500 were stolen from «a 
Tel Aviv bank in an armed hold- 
up. On the 13th a large body of 
armed Jews stole 450 pounds of 
geligpite and other explosives from 
| he Mtore at Petah Tiqvah of Solel 
Boneh Ltd. a Jewish cooperative, 
On the 16th Augus*, the personnel 
of a training unit of the Irgun Zvai 
Leumi were arrested near Banya- 
mins. in possession of arms and ex- 
plosives. On the 20th a Jewish 
settler who had been of assistance 
to the police wags murdered. 

On the 2d September, armed 
Jews dressed as British police at- 
tempted to rob the safe of a Tel 
Aviv bank, and shortly afterwards 
£. P. 5,000 worth of textiles were 
stoien in Tel Aviv. On the 28ih 
September, a British constable 
was fatally wounded in Tel Aviv 
while escorting money for the pay< 
ment of British officials’ salaries, 
On the llth October, 218 rifles, 
fifteen machine guns and a store 
of ammunition were stolen from 
the training depot for Palestinian 
soldiers at Rehovoth. 

On the 16th October, a military 
'truck containing £..P. 14,000 was 
ambushed by armed men who were 
beaten off by the Jewish military 
escort. On the 3lst October, sabo- 
tage occurred in railway communt- 
cations. On the 15th and 16th No- 
vember there were demonstrations 
of protest in Tel Aviv against the 
|policy of the British Government 
as stated by the Secretary of State 
\for Foreign Affairs, when he an- 
inounced in the House of Commons 
jthe decision to set up the Anglo- 
|American Committee. 

These demonstrations culminated 
in looting and mob violence during 
which, in addition to loss of life, 
Government offices were severely 
damaged and the District Office 
rendered unusable. Curfews were 
imposed and the mobs dispersed by 
troons and police. On the 24th No- 
two coastguard stations 
were extensively damaged. On the 
27th December, police headquar- 
ters in Jerusalem, police stations 
in Jaffa ant Tel Aviv and a mili- 
tary depot in Tel Aviv were at- 
tacked by large gangs of armed 
men. Severe damage was caused 
to the police buildings by explo- 
sives and two British constables, 
one Arab telephone operator, one 
British soldier and four Basuto 
soldiers were killed and others 
wounded by fire from automatic 
weapons or explosives. 


Zionist move-' 


and telegraph communications. 
Arab Campaign Gained 


processions and disorderly demon- 
strations. In December, 7 ne 

Government immigration offices in 
During 1938 the Arab campaign] Haifa were cabotaned by bombs in 
jof murder and sabotage gathered) protest : over the Patria disaster 
strength. Gang warfare in the hills) and against the deportation to 
was developed on organized lines! yaurittus of illegal immigrants. 
and was accompanied by increased | 


In July: 1942, the Stern group, an 
terrorism in the towns. The roads : had 
became unsafe and the he roads] extremist band of Jews which ha 


ti 
life of the country was seriously |e" ertgaged in terrorist activity 


isince 1940, came into prominence 
disrupted. Arms and money were with a feries of robberies and mur- 
‘smuggled into Palestine from the ders in ‘the Tel-Aviv area. 
neighboring Arab countries, and Following the Allied successes in 
gangsters and assassins were re- 


|North Africa in 1942, political con- 
tn meen senenee Beirut and | sideratiyns began to overshadow 


|Any Arabs who refused assistance the war issue. In November of 


tion of outrages on the platform 
and in the press may have its ef- Thrain Derailed by Mob 

fect but is not in itself enough;| On the 12th January, 1946, a 
what is required is actual collab-'train was derailed near Haderah 
oration with the forces of law ani and attacked by some 70 armed 
order, especially the giving of in-| Jews, and L. P. 35,000 tn cash in- 
formation leading to the apprehen-|tended for payment of the railway 
sion of the assassins and their ac- staff was stolen. On the 19th Janu- 
complices.” The communiqué then ary, attacks were made on the 
demanded “of the Jewish commu- Central Prison and on an electric 
nity in Palestine, their leaders and substation in Jerusalem, the latter 
representative bodies to recognize resulting in casualties, On the 20th 
and discharge their responsibili-\ January, an attack, resulting in 
ties and not to allow the good casualties and damage, was made 
name of the Yishuv to be preju-'on a coast guard station. On the 


diced by acts which can only bring 3d February, a raid was made for 
jshame and dishonor on the Jewish'arms on a military depot in Tel- 
that year the Biltmore Programme) : 3 - 

Node ra beg Res wdc sar ye. to in-| wes enunciated by the Zionists, people yt boar oh ee Aviv, Pony 6th a _ bmp. 

Th . Ay uction an murder.) 3 nd opposition to the immigration, | After the assassination the Jew- in casue es was made for arms 

roughovt the first five months land transfers and constitutional |##h Agency which had heartily de-/on # military camp near Jaffa. On 

jof the yeer the Jews engaged in licies’' of the mandatory power Plored the outrages of the extrem-|the 20th damage wag done to a 

few acts of retaliation against | Po ame tmore voeal. ' In & speech |!sts. made arrangements to pro- radar station at Haifa. On the 22d 

ae, Sern, but in late June at Tel Hai on the 20th March,| Vide cooperation with the Govern-\attacks were made on police camps, 

fume ‘a Seana Seeeunne, Br iegl Ben Gurion, chairman of the|ment in yn ome ee a and tee gt me Agen 

cout and | ya Ty | executive of the Jewish Agency,|T°T sm, an @ measure of as were attackes n the March, 

execution of a Revision- tated that the end of the war/*nce thus afforded was forthcom- a military camp was attacked. The 

- —_ who had ont ww) an Arab aed sot necessarily mean the|!"g until comparatively recently. total casualties suffered from these 
‘bus and was apprehen in *| 7 

‘session of bombs and revolvers. ¢™4 of 


Highting for the Jews but) During the early part of 1945 incidents in Palestine from the end 
Angry demonstrations against the | might, pn the contrary, be o 


nly there was a lull in Jewish terrorist of the war in Europe to the day of 
activity, but in May, following our arrival in Palestine were 45 
G _|the beginning of their fight. } 4 
ad ge ye er gt FS pert During March, 1943, there was threats by the Irgun Zvai Leumi killed and 278 wounded. 

25th of July bomb explosions in|® notabie increase in the number 


that V-Day for the world would be| It seems clear that the threats 

h D-Day for them, there occurred ato public order in Palestine during 
the Arab fruit market at and manitude of thefts of arms 
7 — and explosives from military es- 


renewed outbreak. On the 13th the Mandatory period have arisen 
tablishnients, and shortly after-/May, telegraph poles were dam-ivery largely out of the conflict be- 
There were other bomb Ward there was revealed the exie- 


aged by explosives and an attempt tween Arabs and Jews with regard 
outrages in! Jerusalem and Jaffa, tence cf a large-scale stealing 
racket vith ramifications through- 


lwas made to attack the Police Mo- to Jewish immigration viewed in 
bile Force Camp at Sarona by lo- the light of its effect upon the po- 
Jewish fee}. cally made mortars. There was a litical future of the country. Until 
G lrecurrence of this attack by mor-! 1939, violence came from the Arabs, 
against action by the grisea PO fire on the 15th May. On the protesting against continued Jew- 
‘Rebel courts were set up, rebel/ment and the military authorities) 54 May, the oil pipeline was ish immigration. Since 1939, it has 
jstamps were issued, and the Old|to stop jhis traffic was aroused by| tured in two places, and on the|come from the Jews, protesting 
(City of Jerusalem became a rally-| the triaf in a military court of two!551. 4 Doice patrol was fired on. against restrictions upon such im- 
jing point of bandits from which Jews who had taken part in theio. the 19th June, mortars aimed|miaration. In 1986 the Arab leed- 
jacts of vislence, murder and in-|traffic. The “arms trial,” as it) at the King’s Birthday parade in ers indicated their inability to halt 
\timidation were organized and per- came to be called, was preceded by| ; -usalem were discovered, and on|violence. In 1946 the Jewish lead- 
|petrated freely and with impunity. | the tria. of two British military |i. following day a similar battery'ers did likewise. 
ion the 24th August the Assistant deserters who = ae —_ 
trict Commissioner at Jenin|to fifteen years’ imprisonment for ' r V 
was murdered. In September,/ complicity in the a APPENDIX VI 
when the rebel power reached its| The two accused Jews were con- 
climax, there was a large increase/ victed af the end of September and The Mandate 
in abductions and a studied con-|sentence‘l to ten and seven years’) He Council of the League of; Whereas by the aforementioned 
centration on the destruction of|imprisonment, respectively. In| Nations: Article 22 (paragraph 8), it is pro- 
Government bulldings and prop-| passing sentence the president of) Whereas the Principal Allied vided that the degree of authority, 
erty and on the seizure of armo-|the court. stated that the trial had! powers have eed, for the pur- control or administration to be 
ries in outlying police posts. On|shown “‘hat there is in existence| of aneenin alte? to the pro- exercised by the Mandatory, not 
the 9th September, Beersheba was/in Palestine a dangerous and wide: | Pv ons of Afticle 22 of the Coven- having been previously agreed up- 
raided by & large gang, and later|spread conspiracy for obtaining) | t of the League of Nationa, to 0m by the Members of the League, 
in the month police and Govern-|arms ard ammunition from His| trust to a Mandatory selected shall be explicitly defined by the 
ment buildings there were set on|Majesty’s forces” and that the Of-|by the said Powers the adminis- Council of the League of Nations; 
fire and destroyed. The Palestine| ganizatiin behind the activities of sation of the territory of Pales-| Confirming the said Mandate, 
defines its terms as follows: 
Article 1 
The Mandatory shal! have full 


tine, which formerly belonged to 
knowl. the Turkish Empire, within such 
4- boundaries as may be fixed by 

them; and powers of legislation and of ad- 

ministration, save as they may be 

limited by the terms of this man- 

date. 











| 








Arabs and the wound:ng of 129 


| 
| 


By July, 1938, the Arab gangs out the Middle East. 


| garrison was reinforced in July|the two accused “seems to have 
jand again in late September, and/had considerable funds at its dis- 


iby the end of the year large-scale posal antl to possess wide 
the gangs to comparative impo-|ing military organization.” 
tence in the field. But terrorism; The trial caused considerable! 
and sabotage continued almost un-| bitterness on the part of the Jewish 
abated. lcommuntty against the Govern- 

During the first eight months of ment which, they thought, should 
1938 the Arab rebellion continued, recognize that the Jews had a) 
but with gradually diminishing| moral right to arm. Feeling was 
vigor. The large gangs broke up\aggravatied by the facts that the 
and dissension grew among the| trial was held in public and that 
leaders. In March Abdul Rahim el-| Jewish cfficial bodies were 


Whereas the Principal Allied 
Powers have also agreed that the 
Mandatory should be responsible 
|\for putting into effect the declara- 
ition originally made on Nov. 2, 
1917, by the Government of His 
\Britannic Majesty, and adopted by 
‘the said Powers, in favor of the 
men- establishment in Palestine of a 

lnational home for the Jewish peo- 


Article 2 


The Mandatory shall be respon- 
sible for placing the country un- 
der such political, administrative 
and economic conditions as will se- 
cure the establishment of the Jew- 


Haj Mohammed was killed ip ac- 


brigandage continued on a consid- 


tion, and the other principal lead-| ceedings. 
ers soon left Palestine. There re-|in the Jewish press that the trial! 
mained, however, small groups of was an anti-Semitic “frame-up 
outlaws who proceeded to rob and aimed at discrediting the Jewish 
The extended Arab disturbances destroy life and property in the authoriti¢ 
of 1936-1939 in support of demands/hill villages, while assassins re- fort. 
per-|for the stoppage of Jewish immi-|mained active in the urban areas.| 
ison who, in the considered opinion|gration, the prohibition of land|Though intor-Arab terrorism and 


tioned ir; the course of the pro-| 

le, it being clearly understood 
Amsgetene were mae that nothing should be done which 
»|might prejudice the civil and re- 
iligious rights of existing non-Jew- 
. lish communities in Palestine, or 
s and the Jewish war ef-/11.. rights and political status en- 
\joyed by Jews in any other coun- 
Tertorism Rose in 1944 ‘try; and 


The year 1944 saw an increase) Whereas recognition has there- 


erable scale until the end of the Of terrorism by the Jewish ex- by been given to the historical 


year, the outbreak of the second|tremists 


hf the Irgun Zvai Leumijconnection of the Jewish people 


World War was marked by a de-and the Stern groups. On the 3d/with Palestine and to the grounds 
crease in crimes of a political February, 1944, two Jews were for reconstituting their national 


nature. 
1,791 Killed In Three Years 


|surprised tampering with the wall/home in that country; and 
of St. Géorge’s Cathedral. From| Whereas the Principal Allied 
articles Isft behind, it appeared| Powers have selected His Britan- 


During the Arab revolt, from the|that they had been engaged ininic Majesty as the Mandatory for 


middle of 1936 to the end of 1939, 
there were 1,791 verified deaths 


Revisionists, is a smaller, less well-|against Jewish immigration and|On the 17th April the funera! of and 3,288 cases of injury as a re- 


The immigration provisions of/armed, but more radical body|the withholding of independence.'one of the Jews led to an anti-|sult of the disorders. In addition, 


the White Paper were also in gen-|which, sigce 1943, has eng 


ed in|More recently, Jewish opposition|Arab demonstration in Tel Aviv,|it is conservatively estimated that 


and two days later Arabs in Jaffa|some 2,000 Arab rebels were killed 


eral put into effect. Powers were|an intermittent series of rob 
given the High Commissioner to 
set a limit upon the total immi- 
gration into Palestine and quotas 
were established on a basis which 
it wag expected would permit the 
entry by 1944 of the 75,000 persons 


ries\to the policies — in the 

and extortions to produce funds White Paper of 1939 has been re-|fell upon the Jewish pulation|by police and military action. 

and of bombing attacks upon Gov-|sponsible for unrest and violence./and killed three persons before the| There has not since 1939 been a 

ernment buildings, transport and; As early as 1920, Palestine Arab\police, reinforced by troops, man-jrecrudescence of Arab disorders. 
lise installations. The so-called/opposition to Zionism and desire|aged to disperse them. On the 2ist/The military authorities stated to 
tern. Group, a dissident faction,/for self-government led to a/April a general strike was called|the committee that through recent 


once a part of the Irgun, is the'threat to public security. Propa- by the Arab leaders to protest|years the Arabs have been quies- officer ahd a British constable with the following provisions; and 


the installation of an infernal ma-|Palestine; and 

chine at the gate of the cathedral; Whereas the mandate in respect 
through which the High Commis-\of Palestine has been formulated 
sioner ustially passed on his wayjin the following terms and sub- 
|to Sunday service. On the 12th|mitted to the Council of the 
|February there were explosions in|League for approval; and 


ish national home, as laid down in 
the preamble, and the development 
of self-governing institutions, and 
also for safeguarding the civil and 
religious rights of all the inhabi- 
tants of Palestine, irrespective of 
race and religion 
Article 3 

The Mandatory shall, so far as 
circumstances permit, encourage 
local autonomy. 

Article 4 

An appropriate Jewish agency 
shall be recognized as a public 
body for the purpose of advising 
and cooperating with the “Admini- 
stration of Palestine in such eco- 
nomic, social and other matters as 
may affect the establishment of 
the Jewish national home and the 
interests of the Jewish population 
in Palestine, and, subject always to 
the control of the Administration, 


the offices of the Department of| Whereas His Britannic Majesty to assist and take part in the de- 
|Migration in Jerusalem, Tel Avivjhas accepted the mandate in re- velopment of the country 

jand Haifa, and considerable dam-|spect of Palestine and undertaken’ The Zionist Organization, so long 
‘age was done to the buildings. On|to exercise it on behalf of the as its organization and constitu- 
the 14th February « British police/League of Nations in conformity 





Continued on Following Page 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. ‘a 


Provisions of League’s Palestine Mandate)st:* toc crormes...tw rae 


| 
PaaS without the approval of| tions, act in such a way as to ex-\ritories as he may consider suit- 
oa | the Council. clude scholars of any nation with-|able to those conditions, provided 
tion are in the: opinion of the Man- Article 15 out good grounds. ithat no action shall be taken 
datory appropriate, shall be recog- (8) The proceeds of excavations| which is inconsistent with the pro- 
, The Mandatory shall see that/may be divided between the exca-| visions of Articles 15, 16 and 18. 
nized as such agency It shall! complete freedom of conscience vator and the competent Depart- 
take steps in consultation with His|and the free exercise of all forms| ment in a proportion fixed by that Article 26 
Britannic Majesty's Government to|of worship, subject only to the) Department. Ue division seemsim-| The Mandatory agrees that if 
secure the cooperation of all Jews|™aintenance of public order and/possibis for scientific reasons, the|any dispute whatever should arise 
who are willing to assist in the morals, are insured to all. No dis- excavator shall receive a fair in-|between the Mandatory and an- 
wend ‘crimination of any kind shall be/demnity in lieu of a part of the|other member of the League of 
establishment of the Jewish n&-\made between the inhabitants of tind. Nations relating to the interpreta- 
tional home |Palestine on the ground of race,| . tion or the application of the pro- 
Article 5 ireligion or language. No person) Article 22 visions of the mandate, such dis- 
The Mandatory shall be |shall be excluded from Palestine on| English, Arabic and Hebrew| pute, if it cannot be settled by ne- 
a ee : respon the sole ground of his religious be-|shall be the official languages of otiation, shall be submitted to the 
aible for sesing that no Palestine) iict Palestine. Any statement or in-|Permanent Court of International 
territory shall be ceded or leased’ The right of each community to scription in Arabic on stamps or! Justice provided for by Article 14 
to, or in any way placed under the Maintain its own schools for the'money in Palestine shall be re-|of the Covenant of the League of) 
education of its own members in peated in Hebrew and any state-| Nations. 
Sereign power its own language, while conform. | ment or tnscription in Hebrew shall 
s" P . jing to such educational require-|be repeated in Arabic. 
The consent of the Council of 


Article 6 |ments of a general nature as the! 
The Administration of Palestine |Administration may impose, shall Article 23 the League of Nations is required 
The Administration of Palestine| {0% &Y modification of the ae 


NEW YORK MA 


Continued From Preceding Page 





control of, the Government of any 
Article 27 


while ensuring that the rights and/not be denied or impaired. | 
position of other sections of the! Article 1€ ‘shall recognize the holy days of ° this mandate. 
population are not prejudiced, ghall| The Mandatory shall be respon-|the respective communities in) Article 28 
facilitate Jewish immigration un-|#ible for exercising such super- | Palestine as legal days of rest for, In the event of the termination| 
Ger suitable conditions and shall|Y!#on over religious or eleemosy-|the members of such communities.| .»°1,. mandate hereby conferred 
encourage, in cooperation with the | DAtY bodies of all faiths in Pales- Article 24 upon the Mandatory, the Council 
tine ag may bo requires Ser. the) lof the League of Nations shall’ 
Jewish Agency referred to in Arti-|maintenance of public order and) The Mandatory shall make to make such arrangements as may} 
cle 4, close settlement by Jews on| good government. Subject to guch|the Council of the League of Na- deemed necessary for safe-| 
the land, including state lands and supervision, no menmareg sah be|tions an annual report to the sat- guarding in perpetuity, under 
waste lands not required for pub-|taken in Palestine to truct of|isfaction of the Council as to the guarantee of the League, the rights 
lic purposes linterfere with the enterprise yo pprecmmges taken during the year to! soured by Article 13 and 14, and| 
lsuch bodies or to discrimizate|carry out the provisions of the shall use its influence for securing, 
Article 7 against any representative or|mandate. Copies of all laws and! under the guarantee of the League, 
The Administration of Palestine member of them on the ground of |regulations promulgated or issued)tnat the Government of Palestine 
shall be responsible for enacting a| is religion or nationality. jduring the year shall be com-/ wij) fully honour the financial obli- 
nationality law. There shall be in- Article 17 municated with the report. gations legitimately incurred by 
cluded in this law provisions 


The Administration of Palestine Article 25 the Administration of Palestine 


framed so as to facilitate the ac-|may organize on a voluntary basis during the period of the mandate, 
quisition of Palestinian citizenship|the forces necessary for the Ty Paghne Beyeer yoy ~ oe lg con including the rights of public serv- 
by Jews who take up their perma-jervation of peace and order, and) of Palestine e rt tele da. [ants to pensions or gratuities. 
nent residence in Palestine. also for the defense of the coun- nat the BM Ae ~ ehat The present instrument shall be 
try, subject, however, to the su-|¢¢™ined, the Mandatory shall be/ deposited in original in the archives 
Article 8 pervision of the Mandatory, but|/¢mtitled, with the consent of the/of the League of Nations and cer- 
The privileges and immunities|shall not use them for p eye of the —_ rr} pon pa tified copies shall be forwarded by 
of foreigners, including the bene-|other than those above specified! © postpone “E w old applica-'the Secretary General of the 
fits of consular jurisdiction and/save with the consent of the| “on Md Es oe: pear - of pris League of Nations to all members 
protection as formerly enjoyed by| Mandatory. Except for such pur- Stes rs ‘on the eniat aie “4 nap-|ot the League. P 
Capitulation or usages in the Oto-| poses, no military, naval or air | Piicabdle @ existing local con | Done at London the twenty- 
|tions, and to make such provision/fourth day of July, one thousand! 


shal b - ised or ain-| 
gy bapa ng a portend ng Pls a gentadatantinnn of for the administration of the ter-'nine hundred and twenty-two. 


Uniess the Powers whose na-/ Palestine. 
tionals enjoyed the aforementioned; Nothing in this article shall pre-| APPENDIX VII 
privileges and immunities on Aug.|clude the Administration of Pales-| List of Staff 
i, 1914, shall have previously re-|tine from contributing to the cost) 0 ta 
nounced the right of their re-estab- of the maintenance of the forces AMERICAN 
lishment, or shall have agreed to of the Mandatory in Palestine. 
their nonapplication for a speci-| The Mandatory shall be entitied| 
fied period, these privileges and at all times to use the roads, rail- 
immunities shall, at the expiration|ways and ports of Palestine for 


ef the mandate, be immediately the movement of armed forces and) 
re-established in their entirety or the carriage of fuel and supplies, 


BRITISH 
Research Staff 
Paul L. Hanna Paul A, Wilson 
Frederick V. Loud E. Christie Willatts 
William F, Stinespring Miss Hazel Hamilton 
Miss Mary Chanter 


Administrative Officers 


with such modifications as may) 
have been agreed upon between | 
the Powers concerned. 


Article 9 


The Mandatory shall be respén- 
sible for seeing that the judicial | 
system established in Palestine! 
shall assure to foreigners, as well 
as to natives, a complete guaran- 
tee of their rights. 

Respect for the personal status 
of the various peoples and com-) 
munities and for their religious in-! 
terests shall be fully guaranteed.' 
In particular, the control and ad- 
ministration of Waqfs shall be ex- 
ercised in accordance with reli- 

ious law and the dispositions of 

e founders. 


Article 10 


Pending the making of special 
extradition agreements relating to 
Palestine the extradition treaties 
in force between the Nandatory| 
and other foreign Powers shall ap- 
ply to Palestine. 


Article 11 


The Administration of Palestine 
shall take all necessary measures’! 
to safeguard the interests of the 
community in connection with the 
development of the country, and, 
subject fo any international obliga-| 
tions afcepted by the Mandatory, 
shall have futl power to provide) 
for public ownership or control of 
any of the natural resourges of the 
country or of the public works, 
services and utilities established or 
to be established therein. It shall 
introduce a land system appropri- 
ate to the needs of the country, 
having regard, among other things, | 
to the desirability of promoting the| 
close settlement and intensive cul-| 
tivation of the land. | 

The Administration may arrange) 
with the Jewish Agency mentioned | 
in Article 4 to construct or operate, 
upon fair and equitable terms, any) 
public works, services and utilities, | 
and to develop any of the natural! 
resources of the country, in so far) 
as these matters are not directly 


| 


| 


|Mandatory, 


Article 18 

The Mandatory shall see that 
there is no discrimination i; Pal- 
estine against the nationals of any 
State Member of the League of 
Nations (including companies in- 
corporated under its laws) as com- 
pared with those of the Mandatory 
or of any foreign State in matters 
concerning taxation, commerce or 
navigation, the exercise of indus- 
tries or professions, or in the treat- 
ment of econ vessels or ¢ 
aircraft. Similarly, there shall ; 
no discrimination in Palestine Files to Oppose Wheeler 
against goods originating in ordes-| HELENA, Mont., April 30 @P) 
tined for any of the said States,|—Lief Erickson, former member 
and there shall be freedom of tran-/.¢ the state Supreme Court, today 


sit under equitable conditions 
across the mandated area. filed for the Democratic nomina- 


Subject as aforesaid and to the|tion for United States Senator 
other provisions of this mandate,|against the incumbent, Burton K. 
the Administration of Palestine|Wheeler. Senator Wheeler, who is 
may, on the advice of the Manda- 
tory, impose such taxes and cus- 
toms duties as it may consider neo- 
essary, and take such steps as it 
may think best to promote the de-| 


William M. Rountree 
Verbatim 


Miss Margaret Omer 
Miss Helen B. Campbell! 


Mies Helen Randall 

Miss Dorothy C, Herchanroeder 
Mrs. Frances R. Warden 

Mrs. Sue Freshman 

Miss Suzanne McDowall! 


of country and to safeguard 
the interests of the population. It! 
may also, on the advice of the 
conclude a_ special 
customs agreement with any State! 
the territory of which in 1914 was! 
wholly included in Asiatic Turkey 
or Arabia. \ 


Article 19 | 


The Mandatory shall adhere on| 
behalf of the Administration of! 
Palestine to any general interna-| 
tional conventions already existing, 
or which may be concluded hereé 
after with the approval of the 
League of Nations, respecting the 
slave traffic, the traffic in arms 
and ammunition, or the traffic in 
drugs, or relating to commercial 
equality, freedom of transit and 
navigation, aerial navigation and 
postal, telegraphic and wireless 
communication or literary, artistic 
or industrial property. 


Article 20 
The Mandatory shall co-operate 


William F. Teagle 
Reporters 

Miss Helen Painting, MBE. 

Mias I. M. Audrey Grundy 


Secretarial Staff 


Misa N. Audrey Greig 
Miss Daphne Wakelen 
Miss Elizabeth M. White 


EF 


serving his fourth term, has not 
filed for renomination. “Wheeler 
for Senator’ clubs have been 
formed throughout the State, how- 
ever. Mr. Erickson was defeated 
by Sam C. Ford in the last Guber- 
natorial election. He is an advo- 
cate of the Missouri Valley Au- 
thority and world cooperation. 


: GIMBELS OPEN THURSDAYS till 9 


“igeat wince eee] Giimbels has famous 
Reis knit underwear 
ens 


The New York manner 


Among other things, good fashion is a matter of background. 
What looks correct and becoming against the tropical foliage and hot skies of 


Florida—or in the wide and breezy spaces of the West— 


7 = - 
is apt to seem incongruous in the steel-and-stone panorama of New York. 


undertaken by the Administration.'on behalf of the Administration of | 
Any such arrangements shall pro-| Palestine so far as religious, social 
vide that no profits distributed by|and other conditions may permit 
such agency, directly or indirectly,/in the execution of any common! 
shall exceed a reasonable rate of|policy adopted by the League of| 
interest on the capital, and any|Nations for preventing and com- 
further profits shall be utilized by|bating disease, including diseases 


For this reason, New Yorkers instinctively prefer low-keyed colors—patterns 





it for the benefit of the country 
in a manner approved by the Ad-| 
ministration 


Article 12 | 


The Mandatory shall be en-' 
trusted with the control of the for- 
eign relations of Palestine, and the 
right to issue exequaturs to consuls 
appointed by foreign powers. He 
shall also be entitled to afford dip- 
lomatic and consular protection to 
citizens of Palestine When outside 
its territorial limits 


Article 18 


All responsibility in connection 
with the holy places and religious 
buildings or sites in Palestine, in-| 
cluding that of preserving existing | 
rights and of securing free access| 
to the holy places, religious build-| 
ings and sites and the free exer-| 
cise of worship, while insuring the) 
requirements of public order and 
decorum, is assumed by the Man- 
, datory, who shall be responsible 
solely to the League of Nations in| 
all matters connected herewith, 
provided that nothing in this arti- 
cle shall prevent the Mandatory 
from entering into such arrange- 
ments as he may deem reasonable! 
with the Administration for the) 
purpose of carrying the provisions) 
of this article into effect; and pro-| 
vided also that nothing in this! 
Mandate shall be construed as con-| 
ferring upon the Mandatory author-| 
the management of purely Moslem 
sacred shrines, the immunities of 
which are guaranteed 


Articie 14 
A special commission shall be 


appointed by the Mandatory to|Department. 
| (6) Equitable 


study, define and determine the 


ity to interfere with the fabric or| 


of plants and animals. 
Article 231 


The Mandatory shall secure the 
enactment within twelve months 
from this date and shall ensure the 
execution of a Law of Antiquities 
based on the following rules. This | 
law shall ensure equality of treat- 
ment in the matter of excavations 
and archaeological research to the 
nationals of all States Members 
of the League of Nationa. 

(1) “Antiquity” means any con-'| 
struction or any product of human 
activity earlier than the year 1700 


(2) The law for the protection 
of antiquities shall proceed by en- 
couragement rather than by threat. 

Any person who, having discov-| 
ered an antiquity without being) 
furnished with the authorization) 
referred to in paragraph 5, reports 
the same to an official of the com- 
petent Department shall be re- 


jwarded according to the value of 


the discovery. 

(3) No antiquity may be dis- 
posed of except.to the competent! 
Department unless this depart- 
ment renounces the acquisition of 
any such antiquity. 

No antiquity may leave the coun- 
try without an export license from | 
the said Department. 

(4) Any person who maliciously 
or negligently destroys or dam-| 
ages an antiquity shall be Hable to 
a oye A to be fixed, 

(5) No clearing of ground or 
digging with the object of finding) 
antiquities shall be permitted, un-| 
der penalty of fine, except to per-/ 
sons authorized by the competent 


phone for two or more in 
for the scarcer 40 to 44's. 


1.30 





The white cotton in these 


terms shall be! 


REIS FAMOUS SCANDALS 
“Scandals” have been among the 
hard-to-gets. Now you can have those famous-for- 
comfort briefs again! Tailored with Reis’ famous 
dart feature. Fine white cotton, spring needle knit 
for more shape-keeping elasticity. 30-44. Write, 


BRIEFS) 
rdest of the 


sizes 30 to 88. Come in 
Gimbels Street Floor. 


REIS KNIT COTTON T SHIRTS 


shirts is soft as a baby's 


and designs that reflect a certain formality— matched or harmonized 


effects in shirts, ties, handkerchiefs and hose—and, in general, a look of 


quiet understatement that is the essence of good taste. 


Because our concern is exclusively with New Yorkers—or with men who like 
the New York manner of dressing~we specialize in creating or selecting 
clothes and accessories that fit smoothly into the metropolitan ideal. 

You will make few mistakes if you rely upon our judgment. 


May we be permitted to demonstrate next time you are in our neighborhood? 


Weber ao Heilbroner 


57th St. and Broadway 


42nd St. and Madison Avenue 34th St. and Broadway 


rights and claims in connection|fixed for expropriation, temporary 
with the holy places, and the rights|or permanent, of lands which 
and claims relating to the different|might be of historical or archaeo- 


religious communities in Palestine. | logical interest. 


downy head—the neck band is specially con- 
structed to hold its shape and ‘not sag ioose. These 
shirts as the navy will tell you (the sailors called 
The method of nomination, the| (7) Authorization to excavate! them “skivvy shirts”) are about the most com- 
composition and the functions of)shall only be granted to persons fortable thing a man can wear. Sizes 36-44, 


this commission shall be submitted|/who show sufficient guarantees of | ros . ‘treet Flo 
to the Council of the League for its|archaeological experience. The Write, telephone for two or more. Street Floor, 
approval, and the commission shall|Administration of Palestine shall ahipping charge 400 beyond delivery eres, within 600 milea, 

not be appointed or enter upon its/not, in granting these authoriza- Srd & Bway, New York 1,N. Y. PEnn 6-5100 


36 Broad St. 


Newark: 776 Broad Street 


Madison Avenue at 57th St. 
Brooklyn: 381 Fulton Street (opposite Boro Hiall) 


160 Broadway (near Maiden Lane) 


STORE HOURS: 9 A.M. TO 6 P.M, 


a 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 
Books Published Today 


22 L + 
Brack Miscursr, by Evelyn Waugh 


MORE HEALTH CARE | Patrolman Gets 8 Awards F rom the Navy WOMEN VOTERS’ AID 
IN STATE PROPOSED) For Heroism as an Airman in the Pacific! 10 [],N, ADVOCATED) _<atyssiati, * "= 


ry dns Be ite he ; re | Catt THe Lavy INpisceseT, by Paul 


| Whelton (Lippincott, $2). A de- 


Medical Society Advocates the Biennial Session Opens With) ‘ective story previously listed, 
| but postponed, 


| 
Voluntary Establishment Program Stressing Need | Now To Live, by Ralph W. Sock- 


_ if F a ; (Abi -Cokesbury, $2). | 
of County Departments | 8 io ” of Full U. S. Support Sienij-diee eteien erases. 
a : 4 -— ¥ ; ' Tris Is Goopsre, by Betty Baur | 


| (Lippincott, $2.50). A novel. may remind you of 
| | 


Miss Alcott’s Meg 


"Cwenty-five selected sermons 
—t— - 


By BESS FURMAN 

Special to Tus New Youn Tiwas 
sional salaries commensurate with | 
KANSAS CITY, April 30 The! the responsibilities of the office;| 
biennial convention of the twenty-|improved relationships betwegn | 
five-year-old National League of/Congress .and_ the Executive) 
Women Voters opened here today branch; delegation to other bodies) 


le breakfast, di lof such functions as District of! 
pement 6 single breakfast ~~ Columbia government and private 


ar luncheon on a four-day Program | -iaims; installation of modern 
for 500 women delegates long alert equipment such as electric voting| 
to the world famine situation. machines; improved procedures for | 

At the opening session today,/apfraising the overall picture of | 
Miss Anna Lord Strauss in her| Feceral expenditures and revenues. | 
presidential report attributed her| Assumption by government of 
own position as an official adviser responsibility to prevent inflation 
to the food and agricultural organ- and deflation and to stimulate 
ization and as a member of/™#<i!mum production and employ- 
the President's Famine Emergency ment, with four illustrative meas- 
Committee to the work that the\“T¢# specified—continuation of 
league hag done in helping educate price and rent contro] through the 
the country to the importance of|Teconversion period; high taxes to 
using food as a factor for world |Teduce the national debt in times 
peace by sending it to the famine|°! inflation; Federal encourage- 


Voluntary establishment of 
county health departments through-| 
out New York State to correct de-| 
ficiencies in public health admin-| 
istration was urged yesterday by, 
the Medical Society of the State of) 
New York at its 140th ennual 
meeting in the Hotel Pennsyl-| 
vania. 

A resolution adopted by the ao- 
ciety’s House of Delegates de- 
clared that in many townships, 
villages and small cities in the 
State public health services exist- 
ed only as part-time organizations 
and created “limitations” in serv- 
ice. The delegates voted to send 
copies of the resolution to Gover- 
nor Dewey and Dr. Edward 8. 
Godfrey, State Commissioner of 
Health. The House of Delegates 


POL CEE EEN OO bette bet FOG beh OeE Dea ER teeter tai | 


$24 


ling 
ovel 


ERICH MARIA REMARQUE’S 


magnificent novel of love and revenge 
..» Which is “so swift-moving and full- 
blooded it makes most current novels 
seem thin and anemic.” (Lewis Gannett, 


ege ett 


teapite 


—— oGOGt ChEME LE oe eEmet eter dite 


is a policy-making group that rep- 


areas of Europe. 


ment of housing programs; public 


resents 19,940 physicians and sur- 
geons in the State. 


Fee Revision Sought 


The group also adopted a report 
recommending revision of the 
fee schedule of the State Work- 
men's Compensation Act. The re-| 
port urged that physicians’ fees be 
adjusted to more nearly approxi- 
mate the charges of physicians in|! 
private practice. It declared that! 
“high quality medical care should 
be rewarded adequately in the in- 
terest of those who are benefici- 
aries.” 

The delegates also held that or- 
ganized medicine should have con-| 
trol of the care of veterans suffer- 
ing from service-connected dis- 
abilities. A corporate organiza- 
tion was pvroposed as the medium! 
for such care. The fee schedule, 
it was declared, “must be scaled 
high enough to be equitable and 
reasonable enough to be accepted 
by the Veterans Administration.” | 

Another report adopted called 
for liberalization of medical care 
insurance plans to make it possible 
for all persons to enroll. The re- 
port advocated full publicity for! 
voluntary pre-payment medical 
care plans, “emphasizing their! 
benefits as against those of any 
compulsory health program pro- 
pounded by either State or Federal 
g@ource.” 


Integration of Interests 


| 


The report urged also that the 
Medical Society of the State work 
for greater integration of interests 
among the various medical plans in 
operation. It was desirable to ea- 
tablish “at least one policy of uni- 
formed benefits,” the report said 

Three 14-year-old junior high 
achool students were honored at 
the morning session of the House 
of Delegates. They received prizes 
for essays written during the so- 
ciety’s campaign against an anti-| 
vivisection bill that was defeated! 
at the last session of the State 
Legislature 

A 2 


Patrolman Vincent P. O'Rourke is decorated by Rear Admira! 
Monroe Kelly. ‘The New York Times (U. 8. Navy) 


Patrolman Vincent P. O’Rourke/face of intense enemy fire, the 
of 66-24 Seventy-ninth Place, Mid-|citation said, he scored so many 
die Village, Queens, received eight/hits and inflicted so much damage 
awards from the Navy Depart-/that the carrier was incapable of 
ment yesterday for heroism he)offensive action. 
showed as a Navy pilot in action in|} He won the second Navy Cross 
the Pacific in 1945. \for action against an enemy cruiser 

In ceremonies at the head-jon July 28, 1945. Ignoring severe 
quarters of the Third Naval Dis-janti-aircraft iire, he scored two 
trict, 90 Church Street, he was|bomb hits on the vessel, con- 
decorated with one Navy Cross, a|tributing to its sinking. 
gold star in lieu of a second Navy| The Distinguished Flying Cross 
Cross, a 
Cross, the Air Medal and four gold 
stars signifying four additional 
Air Medals. 

The presentations were made by 
Rear Admiral Monroe Kelly, com- 
mandant of the Third Naval Dis- 
trict. Mr. O'Rourke was accompa- 
nied by his wife, Harriet. 

He received the first Navy Cross 


islands of Kyushu and Nansei- 
Shoto from March to May, 1945. 
He received the Air Medals for 
numerous missions against the 
Japanese. 

During these actions he was a 
lieutenant, junior grade, piloting a 
carrier-based torpedo bomber. At 
for his attack on a large enemy|present he is attached to the 
carrier off the island of Honshu on|Bighteenth Precinct, 306 West 
March 19, 1945. Attacking in the Fifty-fourth Street. 





NEW RESTRICTIONS | “1 Know How You F uve 


Hoover Tells Osmena | 


iy Wireless to Tas New Youx Times 


oEI ON DISTILLING MANILA, April 30—Before 


| Herbert Hoover left for Shang- 


| 


Continued From Page 1 | hai to continue his food investi- 


been weakened by poor nutrition. | 
Fertilizers are extremely short. 
“Because it was immediately) 
| 

upon us, the problem of keeping) 
people alive until this summer's) 
harvest had been tackled first.| 
That is why the famine emergency) 
committee has called for sharp, 





elect Manuel Roxag and Presi- 
dent Sergio Osmena at a dinner 
at the home of Paul V. McNutt, 
the High Commissioner. When 
the former President of the 
United States shook hands with 
Mr. Osmena, he is reported to 
have smiled and said: 


of human) 


Miss Strauss also claimed for Control of atomic energy under a) 


Distinguished Flying|was awarded for heroism shown as 
a section leader in flights over the 


gation tour, he met President- | 


civilian agency to insure full de- 
the league a considerable share Ci chcoment in the public 


and full conformity with interna- 
tional agreements 

Miss Strauss also told of the 
league's current work in helping 
educate the women voters of many 
other nations. This included a 
speaking trip by Mrs. Louise Leon- 
ard Wright of Chicago through 
France just in advance of the elec- 
tions in which French women voted 
for the first time 


Ends 53 Years of Service 
Edward J. Hanly of Ho-Ho-Kus, 


the credit for the fact that “the! 


first strong wave favoring mill-| 
jtary control of the atom bomb was 
snowed under.” 


Membership Up 18 Per Cent | 


| Miss Strauss told the 500 dele- 
|gates here that the league mem- 
bership in the last two years had 
lincreased from 54,782 to 61,990, a 
|13 per cent gain; that its publica- 
|tions had almost doubled, from 
16,674 to 31,281; that it was “fi-! 
inancially better off than ever be-! 
\fore.”” She said there were 525 lo- 
cal leagues and thirty-four State 
leagues. 

By vote of the delegates two 
observers from other countries 
|were admitted to the sessions: Mrs 
|Marjorie Spikes of 
the British Embassy and Mrs. 
She-harun Chiang Lee, director of 
the Women's Work Department, 
{Chinese Industrial Cooperatives 

Miss Strauss also presented the) 
|proposed program of work for the) 
jnext two years which will be acted 
upon here. It included: 

Acceptance by the United States 
of its full share of responsibility 
\for strengthening the United 
|Nations, with seven specific ways 
to strengthen—delegation of arma- 
iment control to the United Nations, 
jwith the Achcoson report as basis 
for control of atomic energy; full) 
United States cooperation in the 
U. N. special agencies; continued 
jsupport of international relief and 
irehabilitation; full use of trustee- 
iship provisions of the charter; 
jcompulsory jurisdiction of the 
|World Court; support efor United 
|States loans and lowering of tariff) 





|barriers through reciprocal agree-| 
jments, broadening United Nations 
jauthority. | 


| 
Seek Change in Congress 


| Strengthening the organization 
land procedures of Congress, with 
jnine specific ways mentioned—re- 


|duction of number of committees 


interest . 


s ; 
... but you ain't 
seen nobody like 


HANNAH 


N. J., will retire on pension today) 


after fifty-three years of continu- 


ous employment with Swift & Co.,| ; 


the longest service record of the 
meat packing company's 65,000) 


He lives with his wife, Mena, and) 


the staff of ¢™Ployes throughout the country.) g—— 


two children, Bdward Jr., 26 years) | 


old, a retired naval officer, and 


Jean, a nurse. 


Events Today 


Second annual radio and business 
conference, sponsored by City Col-} 
lege. Hotel McAlpin, 10 A. M Lunch-| 
eon at 12:30 P. M. Speakers: Fiorello) 
H. La Guardia, John Kieran and 
others. Dinner at 7:30 P.M. Speak-! 
ers: Harry M. Wright, president of 
City College; Mayor O'Dwyer and 
others 


American Design Awards luncheon 
aponsored by Lord & Taylor, Wal 
dorf-Aastoria Hotel 12:15 P M 
Speakers: Senator Wayne Morse and 
Dr. Howard A. Rusk 


Luncheon, Kiwanis Club of New 
York, Hotel McAlIpin, 12:30 P. M 
“The Implications of the Air Age 
Gill Robb Wilson 


Luncheon, Overseas Preas Club of 
America, Lotos Club Building, 110, 
West Fifty-seventh Street 12:30 
P M Speaker Frederick Cc 
Oechsner 


Collection. 1 Eaat 
“The Etch 
Franklin M 


Lecture, Frick 
Seventieth Street, 3 P. M 
ings of Rembrandt,"’ 
Biebel. 


JEANNETTE COVERT 
NOLAN 


is a gay and warnvhearted 
story of American yester- 
days, as real as today and 
with a pungency all its 


own. 
At all bookstores © $2.50 


APPLETON -CENTURY 


N.Y. Herald Tribune) 


i 


TRL 


ae 
es 


Al elf bookstores © $3.00 


APPLETON-CENTURY 


’ 
- 


| ie | 
‘an Ue 
Harper A work of 
=% historical importance 


Men, 17 to 30. You can now join: 
the Regular Navy for either two, | 
three, four or six years. Enjoy! 
the security of a Navy enlistment | 
while business settles down. For 
full information, go to your near- 
lest Nav Recruiting Station. 


month-old pedigreed black 
spaniel was presented to Rhoda) consumption of grains, fats and 
Lieberman of 47 East Fifty-fifth| ojis. This is why we have urged 
Street, Brooklyn, as the winner of/that more than grain be diverted ority rule in chairmanships; Cre@-|\sirest, 5:30 P. M. Speakers: 
the first prize. The co-winners of|from the nation’s feed lots. tion of an overall committee iM|Shaw and Tsao Yu 

the second prize, a book of biog-| “These measures support the di- will help keep prices stable at alljeach House to serve as a legisiative . a =e 
raphies of prominent scientists,| rect Governmental steps that have|!evels of distributions, all the way|cabinet; increased staff to serve) Semmes, eenenite — a. — 
were Robert Auerbach of 347 East) been taken. They are absolutely back to the livestock producer|Congress both in individual offices Monetary Problems.” Speakers: M. 3 
137th Street, the Bronx, and Sylvia! necessary to avert mass starva-|imself.” and in a research pool; Congres-!Szymczak and R, C. Leffingwel! 


Strauss of 165 Audubon Avenue. (tion during the months before the 


harvests abroad begin this sum- 
BRITAIN CUTS RATION (™=*:. 
OF CHEESE BY A THIRD 


“The emphasis necessarily 
placed on the 120 days from 
March through June does not mean 

By Wireless to Tas New Youu Times 
: ‘ be over. These 120 days are the 
LONDON, April 30—Sir Ben rirgt step in the race. We have 
Smith, the Minister of Food, in an-|to limit or untold millions of our 


voluntary reduction é 

Association's Peo 
on China 
Forty-third 


Lau 


East and West 
Congress meeting 
own Hall, 123 Weat 


“Mr. President, | know just jand their organization on a func-| 
how you feel.” tional basis; modification of seni-| ples 


Stalin 


An Appraisal of 
the Man and His Influence 


by Leon Trotsky 


Charles Malamuth, Editor and Translator 


Read what 


that the threat of famine will then 


. 
cm 
. 
* 
~ 
- 
- 
~ 
> 
- 
7 
2 
7 
= 
> 
~ 
- 
> 
7 
Ll 
> 
- 
- 
* 
- 
_ 
? 
. 
* 
7. 
ss 
- 
; 
i 
od 
> 
: 
. 
. 
- 
2 
- 
~ 
. 
~ 
7 
. 
- 
= 
. 
. 
na 
. 
= 
~ 
> 
>} 
- 
7 
. 
. 
. 
7. 
a 
- 
: 
. 
. 
- 
. 
= 
= 
- 
. 
; 
7 
. 
a 
2 
7 
nal 
> 
* 
7 
. 
> 
. 
vw 
* 
2 
ie 
. 
> 
. 
~ 
al 
7 
" 
> 
= 
. 
- 
- 
= 
? 
* 
* 
>| 
. 
> 
. 
oo 
> 
nan 
odd 
* 
col 
. 
. 
7 
bel 
- 
el 
- 
a. 
. 
_ 


nouncing that reductiong in the 
size of Great Britain's loaves would 
begin on Sunday, said today that,| 
relatively, the United Kingdom 
was doing as much as the United 
States to alleviate the world grain 
shortage. In making krown, too, 
that there would be a decrease in 


fellow humar beings will be 
eliminated. 

“After we win that first sprint, 
there will be a breathing spell be- 
fore mass hunger reappears in 
the late winter of 1947. This na- 
tion should stert to work now on 
a soundly constructed program to 


meet it.” 


VINCENT 


This carefully documented book by 
Stalin's political opponent traces Stalin's 
career from his school days through his 
rise to power irf the Communist Party. It 


provides also an account of Communist 
politics in the crucial years when the 
USSR was establishing itself as a great 
power. Two-thirds of the book was fin- 
ished by Trotsky himself. The final third 
was completed by Mr. Malamuth from 
Trotsky’s outline, notes, memoranda and 


partly written pages. 


the ordinary cheese ration from 
three to two ounces a week, Sir 
Ben said 

“I cannot say that these cuts 
will be the last.” 

In addition to the known reduc- 
tion of the two-nound loaf to one 
and three-quarter pounds, the four- 
pound loaf will be decreased by 
half a pound, and the one-pound 
loaf will be fourteen ounces. Prices |8¢t in the emergency program. 
for the smaller loaves will be un-| They indicated that the bonus 
changed; but, to offset this, the) Payments would end as scheduled, 
price of potatoes will be reduced by|but that other measures, such as 
the equivalent of 5 cents for four-|the limitation on processing of 
teen pounds, and butter by 4 cents| Wheat for domestic consumption to 
a pound |75 per cent of the corresponding 


Indicate Bonus Will End 


Agriculture Department offi- 
cials refused to say whether Mr. 
Davis’ statement indicated that 
current measures for grain con- 
servation, inchiding the payment 
of a bonus of 3!) cents a bushel for 
jwheat and covn, would be con- 
tinued beyond the terminal dates 


tituate 


| 


SHEEAN 


has to Say about the 


With supplements, appendix, chronolog- 
ical guide, bibliography of Trotsky’'s writ- 
ings available in English, glossary and 


final show dow mW ith 


——— 


The current grain extraction for Period a year ugo, might be con- 


bread was 85 per cent, Sir Ben 
said, and this rate might have to 


tinued. 
Bonus payment for grain drew 


be increased, along with the possi-/&ttention oh Capitol Hill, where 


bility that barley would have to go 
into bread 

By arrangement with the brew- 
ing industry, the standard barrel- 
age of beer would be reduced by 
15 per cent, the Food Minister 
added. The output of beer, how-) 
ever, had increased so much dur- 
ing the war, he declared, that this 
cut would leave production at al- 
most 6 per cent over the pre-war 
level 


INSPECTED MEAT GAINS 


240,000,000 Pounds Produced 
in Week, a Rise of 9 Per Cent 


WASHINGTON, April 30 “> 
For the first time in several weeks 
production of Federally inspected 
meats has exceeded the slaughter 
for a previous week. Production of 
beef was still far below that of this 
time a year ago. 

The Department of Agriculture | 
Meat Board reported today that 
240,000,000 pounds of Federally in-| 
spected meat were produced dvur- 
ing the week ended April 27, 9 per! 
cent more than during the preced- 
ing week but 11 per cent under the 
270,000,000 pounds in the corre- 
sponding week last year 

Cattle slaughter under Federal 
inspection for the week totaled 
145,000 head, 3,000 more than the 
previous week but 85,000 below the 
corresponding week iast year. The 
slaughter of calves was about the 
same as last week, 98,000 head, 
but 16,000 under the same period 
in 1945. Sheep and lambs slaugh- 
tered totaled 413,000 head for the) 
week. 


show 
prices for each grade and cut of 


get compliance with ceiling 
lat the retail level,” he ad 


Representative Miller, Republican 
of Nebraska, introduced a bill to 
permit grain producers to sell to 
anyone at the special bounty price 
now offered by the Government. 

Senator Langer, Republican of 
North Dakota, said in the Senate 
that the Government penalized 
patriotism by its wheat acquisition 
policies. He read letters from 
constituents protesting that, in 
answer to the Government's ap- 
pea! for relief shipments, they had 
sold their wheat early in the year 
before the 30-cent bonus was being | 
paid. 

Some letters, he said, suggested| 
that the bonus be paid on all) 
wheat sold since Jan. 1. | 

The Census Bureau estimated) 
today that 21,000,000 sacks of) 
wheat flour were produced in| 
March, as compared with 25,500,-| 
0c0 in February. Difficulties in 
obtaining wheat forced many mills) 
to curtail operations or close down, 
it added. 

The estimate was based on a 
preliminary tabulation of reports 
from 1,008 milla which account for 
more than 95 per cent of the total) 
output. 


HIS FIRST BOOK 


of the truly great journalists of 


Conference. 


book's title. 





Will Post New Meat Prices 


WASHINGTON, April 30 UP—}| 
Paul Porter, price administrator, 
stated tonight that beginning to- 
morrow butcher shops would post 
new retail meat price lists to help 
stores and housewives “in fight- 
ing off the black market.” 

He said that the lista would 
recently increased retail 


all kinds of people. He has had 


meat. | 

“If the consumer will help to 
rices) 
. “he' 


Soviet Russia. in ~ 


a 


IN THREE YEARS ... 


AND TIMED TO THE MINUTE! 


ite Here is an eyewitness report of history in the making by one 


our day. In the years since BETWEEN 


THR THUNDER AND THE SUN, Vincent Sheean has been on two major 
war fronts as an Army Air Forces officer and in three countries as a 
war correspondent. He also took part in the North African and 
Italian invasions. Here, magnificently told, is what he saw, what | 
he did, and what he thought during the three momentous years 
between the invasion of North Africa and the San Francisco 


The story begins at Versailles as the treaty is being signed, and 
it ends with the meeting of the United Nations at the Palace Hotel. 
‘These two meetings, 27 years apart, point up a strange fact—that 
though Russia wasn't even present at the first, she was one of two 
most powerful nations at San Francisco. The other nation was the 
United States. The emergence of these two powers as the mightiest 
on earth, with all that that implies and threatens, explains the 


There is a lot of loose talk about the fucure of the British Empire 
| and our lack of a foreign policy. There are some who say that 
unless we help Great Britain hoid her empire together, Russia will 
surely engulf us. Vincent Sheean has been all over Europe and met 


time to see what is going on and to 


understand what it means. This book, a full and honest report of 
what he has learned and discovered, will help you to clarify your 
own thinking on these current confusions. 


a 


SATURDAY REVIEW: “No one interested in long range inter- 
national policy, or today's news from the Kremlin, should 





index. Illustrated. 


AT All BOOKSTORES + $5.00 


HARPER & BROTHERS —* 


if AT TT aT aT aT LT a AT Ta 
“Absorbing” “Engrossing” “Dramatic” 
“Piquant and pleasing” 


That's what leading reviewers say of 


Her Husband’s 
House 


by CATHERINE POMEROY STEWART 


The story of “an intelligent Americem girl whe marries @ weelthy lielles 
noblemen end goes to live in @ society rigid with wedition . . an olfe- 
gether evthentic picture. "—New Yorker ew 


ef yeer bookstore SCRIBNERS 
OO a a RO a a aT mee a a aT aa as 


; 
‘ 
\ 
\ 
¢ 


The New York Times ic doing just the’, 
judging from the results of an impartis 
survey among 1,300 of the sation's 
leading sducators. More than halt-- 
50.4 per cont—read The New York 
Times regularly. 


EDUCATING 
EDUCATORS 





7 


By yee ee oe 
A beautiful love 
story and thrilling 
adventure have 
made the record- 


breaking sale of 


THE KINGS 


GENERAL 


by Daphne du Maurier 


A Literary Guild Selection 


At your bookseller’s, $2.73 


=o DOUBLEDAY 2 


| 
| 


| 
= 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


Books of the Tim es 


By ORVILLE PRESCOTT 


one of the wisest men who ever lived, 

once wrote: “Neither is there anything of 

which I am so inquisitive and delighted to inform 
myself as the manner of men’s deaths—their 
words, looks, and bearings—nor any places in 
history I am so intent upon. * * * If I were a 
writer af books I would compile a register, with 
comment, of various 

human deaths.” He 


Mer « ZYQUEM, Seigneur de Montaigne, 


never did, but Vir-, 


ginia Moore has. Her 
register with com- 
ment is entitled “Ho 
for Heaven! Man's 
Changing Attitude 
Toward Desth."* 
Miss Moore believes 
that our attitude to- 
ward death shows our 
attitude toward life. It 
obviously does to a 
certain extent, par- 
ticularly our attitude 
toward religion, im- 
mortality, God and the 
' universe. So she has 
assembled in this book 
Virginia Moore a most wonderful col- 
lection of deathbed scenes and memorable last 
words arranged to show the differing philosophi- 
cal and religious climates of man from antiquity 
to the present. The result is a rich storehouse of 
fascinating anecdotes, but it is not as significant 
or as clear as Miss Moore evidently intended it 
to be. 


Spirituality Through the Ages 


There is a thesis in these pages and it is mys- 
tical, an unquestioning faith in the reality of 
spiritual knowledge and experiences of a spiritual 
world beyond the grave. The ancient Indians, 
Persians and Egyptians, Mise Moore believes, 
were more spiritual than the Greeks and Romana, 
who gave a false importance to matter and were 
too materialistic. The cruder spirituality of the 
Middle Ages, with its exaggerated concentration 
on the omnipresence of death, the hope of heaven 
and the fear of hell, was superior, but the ra- 
tional akepticiam of the eighteenth century and 
the scientific materialism of the nineteenth were 
deplorable. Today there are signs of a fresh 
spiritual rebirth. 

This interpretation of history may or may not 
be valid, but Miss Moore has left ‘t cloudy and 
opaque. Nowhere has she made ary attempt to 
define just what she means by “spirituality.” 
Her personal, poetic, emotional style is an elo- 
quent expression of feeling, but it is hardly his- 
tory. Her careless errors of fact (Omar was not 
an Arabian, Byron not a Victorian) and several 
examples of bad proofreading add to the prevail- 


*HO FOR HEAVEN! Man’e Changing Attitude To- 
ward Death. By Virginia Moore, 209 pages. Dut- 
ton. $3 


ing mistiness of her book. Nevertheless, “Ho 
for Heaven!” has gorgeous stuff in it, a grand 
parade of dying heroes and martyrs, saints and 
sinners, poets ad philosophers. 

“When beggars die there are no comets seen’’; 
neither are the deaths of the lowly and obscure 
often recorded. Inevitably this book is about the 
great, the heroic and the famous. Some died 
proud, some hurnble; some with mystic raptures, 
some with ironic skepticism. The men of the 
Renaissance may have died with dramatic gusto, 
certain of immortality, and the men of the eight- 
eenth century with taste and irony, anxious for 
the applause of men rather than the approval of 
God, but the famillar motifs of belief and doubt, 
joy and resignation, sound throughout all history. 


From the Dawn of History 


In ancient Masopotamia Chosroes I stamped 
upon his seal words that might have been written 
yesterday: “The way is dark. What can I see’? 
Men live once only. What can I desire? Behind 
walks death. IA anything delightful?” Sappho 
of Lesbos expressed what most men have always 
felt: “To die is ¢vil. The gods so consider it, else 
they would die.” But Sappho was a poet express- 
ing emotion. Socrates, a philosopher, looked on 
death with a truly philosophic detachment: “There 
is either annihilation or immortality. Either is 
well.” 

In the Middle Ages faith was general, but 
Abelard sighed on his deathbed the ancient 
doubt: “I don’t Know. I don't know.” Anselm, 
Archbishop of Canterbury, believed, but he ex- 
pressed his scholarly curiosity even as he died: 
“I obey this call gladly. I would also be grateful 
if God granted me a little longer time here and 
permitted me to solve the question of the origin 
of the soul.” Perugino, the painter who taught 
Raphael, believed also, and was also curious, 
When they asked him upon his deathbed if he 
desired the attendance of a priest he replied with 
incredible courage: “No. I am curious to see 
what happens ip the next world to one who dies 
unshriven.” 

Miss Moore ramarks truly that the words of 
the dying are mot necessarily wiser than those 
of the living, but they are more remembered. 
Death is the moet dramatic moment of life. Men 
have always thought so. The aged Duke de 
Montmorency said: “Do you think a man who has 
known how to ‘ive honorably for eighty years 
does not know how to die for a quarter of an 
hour?” And Barrie made his eternally young 
Peter Pan exclaim, “To die will be an awfully 
big adventure.” 

But neither fuith nor doubt can banish fear. 
William Dunbar, the Scotch poet of the ear 
sixteenth century, in his poem lamenting othér 
dead poets wrote fearfully: 

Our pleasure here is all vain glory, 


The flesh is bruckle, the 
Fiend is siee. 
Timor nyortia conturbat me. 


NIGHT © 


| AND — 


THE CITY 


the new 
best-selling novel by 


GERALD 


. 


a 


This false. world is but transitory, 


about the fight between the British| texts. The book will be published 
and the Irish, has written a new! >y Columbia University in June. 
novel, his first in nine years, about es 
| the Irish land uprisings in the time; “Caribbean: Sea of the New, 
of Parnell. “Land” will be pub-| World,” by German Arciniegas, is 
lished by Random House on Maya chronicle of the men and women 
| who discovered it and the countries 
° ” that fought over it. The book was) 
Cantata, exlateniiy ~, ae t.. A story of two years of “protec-|first published in Spanish as “E) 
June publication, has been post- tive custody” of the Japanese-|Mar del Nuevo Mundo,” and has 
’ Afvericans in this country is told) been yg Harriet de Onis. 


poned until July 11. There will be 0 ” 
a single printing of 350,000 copies. py — Lc wagge amare Rig 5 ia” published by Knopf on) 


e 
life saver 
Liam O'Flaherty, whose “The|~— 


- By ki g two hours to | Informer” and “Famine” w 


| Books—Authors 


Spotlight Books, the $1 large pa- 
per reprint line to be published by 
Doubleday, has been delayed be- 
cause of production difficulties. 


A little 


you can | ‘earning 


Angina 
ectoris 
oronary 
eclusion 


KERSH 


As this issue of The New York Times goes to press, more and more 
booksellers are wiring reorders for this magnificent new novel, and 
reporting it as a best-seller. More than a thousand copies a day are 
being sold. Readers of Gerald Kersh's Faces in a Dusty Picture and 
Sergeant Nelson of the Guards are finding thet Night and the City 
is his most fascinating book to date. tt is causing a tremendous 
amount of talk. it is fast, tense reading. It is a tale of two young 
people caught in the feverish whirl of London night life—the cabe- 
rete and clip-joints, and the waxen-faced men of the night whe 
twin afilictions... aad an- ’ eti al, “ prey on unwary pleasure-seekers. It is shocking. And it is intensely 
swers your specific questions 4 LY. 7 readable. $2.75. Simon and Schuster, Publishers, New York 20, N. Y. 


such as “Can I drink? ... | 
smoke? ... work? ... drivea 
car?” ,., and many more, 


by PETER J. 
STEINCROHN 


$2.50 
At your bookseller’s 


DOUBLEDAY 


_ a a 


read this doctor-to-man dis- r 


| 

—__________. | 

Re 

cussion of two dread diseases, ‘ 
| 

| 


Angina Pectoris and Coronary 
Occlusicn, you heart disease 
sufferers .(and your families 
and friends) will better under- 
stand your doctor's orders— 
you may even add years to 
your lives. A first book on the 
subject, xt relates the progress 
made in research on the dis- 
eases, it defines and describes 
the causes, symptoms, diag- 
noses and treatments of the 


mark of the 


AL BIN - 
EATERS 


By Jim 
Corbett 


by Wolfe Kaufman .,,, 
“It describes the hunt- 


isabook| like more “Mp-! sexibe te hunt 


ee HE LOST than somewhat. t that terrorized the hill villages 


of northern India ...no nafra- 


‘ached all over after tive of kiling beasts for pride 
or prowess; it was literally a 


LANDSCAPE is an 
altogether delight. TCAding It. The att- cuesion of the vitge 0 
: gu thor is right up fre Tests ch deals we 


_! ful, exquisitely writ- there with Ray-| derive eory.”-Cariesopbe 


‘ten book. The New mond Chandler,” | cius news 


|England past is re- | = ar OER Se 
created exceedingly mane Soum tong enone 


ee 


——— 


Famous 


—— ee | 


for unsurpassed 
entertainment read.. 


so + — - —— 


oo 
ation! 
‘s GOWINe® , 


RALPH BORSOD! 


A practical postwar plan by «@ 
well known economist that tells 


* 
S “Superb entertainment 
--.@ wholly fascinating 
book.” —Atlanta Journal 


3 
‘In every way an. 
amazing and satisfying | 
| book... instructive . . . enter- 

taining. It is difficult to con- 

ceive another like it can ever 

be written."’—Joseph W. 

Lippincott, Saturday Review STOOD ON END 


*, SO BSESOCAEAAAAAZCBAOAOOD 
~ {BX “Will make people sit | me one THAT's STANDING THE 
up in bed reading late COUNTRY ON END 
at night, listening to the 
twig snap ominously in the 
jungle, hearing the tiger roar.” 
—Charles Poore, NV. ¥. Times 


®e 
@? “Not for years have we 
+ ead a thriller like this. 


You're right there with the 
author as he stalks his prey. 


you what te de in the face of ece- 
nomic disaster. Insure yoursel! tor 
31.20 with the feets that concern 
your money and your future. 

At beokseliers of meiied direst for $1.00 


! STAMM’S for BOOKS 


ed NASSAU ST... N. ¥. 0.3% 


, to light a cigaret as Corbett 
well, and the prose Closes in on ten feet of striped 
is beautiful.” 


|—JOHN COURNOS, Phila. Bulletin 


! 
‘THE LOST LANDSCAPE 


| Memories cf a family and a town 


“All the News That's Fit to Priat” in Connecticut—the oery fabric of 
| America—by WINIF RED WELLES 
declare 


ey Aww @taetegrrtetade 


atom bomb crouching in dap- 
pled shadow... In marty years 
of book reviewing I have sel- 
dom been so carried away by 
factual recital.” 

Sterling North, Chicago Sun 


fe 
| ¢ BP It outdoes any detece 
. tive story in the ingen- 
por vont fous mecing together of details.” 
: «Dorothy Canfield Fisher 


RE SS 4 eae LEN OE MN A NAG MR Se 


Once you start it you'll not 
put it down till you're 
through. The best in years.” 

—Christian Herald | 


877,000 in print inciuding Seok-of-the 


°s 
oo Menth Club @ $2.75 @ LIPPINCOTT 


it POSPOSPIPSLOA®D 

489,000 COPIES IN PRINT ————————— 

Including Bowok-ol-ihe-Month Clot men 17-26 improve your 
AT ALL BOOKSTORES ¢ $2.00 od ion, Train yourself in new 


UNIVERSITY | skills, Join the Marine Corps and 
OXFORD PRESS | horn @ useful trade. Apply 383 


675th Thousand 


A Literary Guild Selection 
$3.00 at bookstores SCRIBNERS 





L 


The New Pork Times 


Reg. U. 8S. Pat. Off. 
“AN the News Vhat's Fit te Priat.” 
Avorn 8. Ocns, Publisher 1806-1965. 


Published Every Day in the Year by 
Tus New York Towss Company. 


Aagtuus Hare Svieesrcsr, 
President and Publisher. 


Jo.rus Octs ADLER, 
Vice President and General Manager. 


Goornsr N. Nutaon, Secretary. 
——————————————————————————— 
WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


OFFICES OF THE NEW YORK TIMES 


Times Tower, Times Sq. (18) | Downtown, 220 Bway (7) 
Mineus...Tel. Garden City 8900. 1527 Frankiin Ave. 
Newssx....... Tel. Market 5-9900. 1744 Broad St. (2) 
Warrs Piaxs Tel. White Plains 5300. 175 Main St. 
Boston ... News, Herald-Traveier Bullding 
Wesurnc7on . News, Albee Bidg. Bacrosone Sur) Bidg. 
Curceco..News, 435 N. Michigan; Bus., 730 N. Michigan 
Dersorr..News, Free Press Bidg ; Bus. Gen. Motors Bidg. 
San Fasncusco.News, Chronicle Bidg ; Bus., Russ Bidg. 
Los ANGELES , .. 448 So. Robertson Bivd. 
Orrewa 23 Goulburn Ave. Lonponw. 85 Fleet Street 
Pants 37 Rue Caumartin. Rows. Vie Della Mervede 54 

. ..» 44 Blackhesth Px.. Clontarf 
Buswos Ame ....... .. .. San Martin 344 
Bio Jan mno ‘ . . Rio Branco 257 
Mavata Manzana deGomes, 213. Mexico City Bucareli 6 
Cana, Zones sows 


SUBSCRIPTION RATES: UNITED STATES, 
POSSESSIONS AND TERRITORIES 
1 Yr. 6 Mos. 3 Mos. 1 Mo. 
eoess BIT.0@ $0.00 $4.25 61.50 
te eee Bee eee 
were so Ue Le Bi) 
. TOne week, We 


Canada, Central and South America 
iYr 6 Mos. 3 Mos. 

.. $22.00 Sil.ee $5.50 

--» 2500 + 3.75 

. oo 40 1. 


For Rates to Other Foreign Countries Apply 
Circulation Department 


THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW (weekly), 
& year, £2; Canada, $3; foreign, $3.50. 
‘Tus New Yoru Taxus U. B. Foreign 
Possessions Canada Countries 
13 monthiy volumes $20 00 $22.08 $20 08 
Annual Cumulative Index 26.00 28.60 a1.0 
Monthiy and Annual..... 35.08 38.58 36 0g 


RAG PAPER edition for preservation, cloth bound, 2 
volumes per month, $200 per annum: semi-monthiy, 
bound volumes, regular newsprint, $80 per annum. 


The Associated Press is entitled exclusively to the 
ese for republication of ail news dispatches credited 
to it of not otherwise credited in this paper and 
local news of spontaneous published herein. 
Rights of republication of all matter herein are 
also reserved. 

=o 


FOUR-POWER ALLIANCE 


Assuming again the bold leadership 
which the United States maintained 
during the larger part of the war, but 
which appeared to wilt for a time in 
the hours of victory, Secretary Byrnes 
has now placed before the Four-Power 
Conference in Paris the most sweep- 
ing proposal in American history as 
this country’s contribution toward an 
enduring peace. This proposal calls 
for nothing less than a hard-and-fast 
alliance between the United States, 
Great Britain, Russia and France for 
the purpose of preventing a revival of 
the German menace by insuring com- 
plete and supervised German disarma- 
ment for at least twenty-five years. 
and as long thereafter as may be nec- 
essary to lead the German people to a 
peaceful and democfatic way of life. 
A similar alliance, presumably includ- 
ing China, is proposed against a re- 
vivel of militarism in Japan. 

This proposal represents a turning 
point in American foreign policy. It 
is not only a far cry from “no entan- 
giing alliances,” a sound enough policy 
in a safer age, and one which formed 
the rallying cry of American isola- 
tionism for many years. It also goes 
beyond any treaty ever proposed by 
the United States before. It goes be- 
yond the alliance between the United 
States, France and Great Britain ne- 
gotiated by Woodrow Wilson for the 
purpose of safeguarding France against 
Germany after the last war—e pro- 
posal rejected by an _ indifferent 
America, together with the Versailles 
Peace Treaty and the League of Na- 
tions. It goes even beyond the Charter 
of the United Nations, which the 
United States has already signed. For 
the treaty of 1919 applied only to 
France and to an actual German at- 
tack upon her, and the Charter re- 
quires American assent to any action, 
because of our possession of the veto 
power. But the proposed new alliance 
provides for long-standing control and 
prompt and automatic action, includ- 
ing the use of military force, whenever 
the Control Commission reports a vio- 
lation of the sweeping disarmament 
provisions of the treaty, which bar not 
only the ordinary military means but 
also the less easily detected atom 
bomb. This means that the American 
Government is prepared to intervene 
even in times of peace in both Europe 
and the Far Hast, whenever the peace 
is threatened anew by our late enemies. 

Yet such an alliance is the obvious, 
nevessary and perhaps only means of 
removing the many apprehensions, mis- 
understandings and ambitions which 
are now delaying peace and world re- 
eovery. As such it deserves the full 
* gupport of the American people. It is 
entirely in the spirit of Teheran and 
Yaita and the many other wartime 
agreements, which pledged the victors 
te continued cooperation: in safeguard- 
ing the peace. It is likewise in keep- 
ing with the United Nations Charter, 
which explicitly provides for special se- 
curity arrangements during the transi- 
tional period and ‘against our late ene- 
mies, It is, indeed, a test of the good 
faith of the Big Powers in carrying out 
their wartime professions, and that in- 
cludes the United States itself. 

On the plea that the German menace 
continues, and that in the absence of 
any definite American commitments 
they might have to face this threat 
alone, both Russia and France have in- 
sisted on an unprecedented extension of 
their security frontiers—Russia across 
half of Europe and beyond, France to 
the Rhineland-.and the Ruhr. The offer 
of the American alliance must now dis- 
close whether these countries are pri- 
marily in search of security or of ter- 
ritory. For Britain it means the defi- 
nite abandonment of any balance-of- 
powor policy«in Europe in which Ger- 
many could serve as & pawn. And for 
the United States it means the final 
and irrevocable abandonment of isola- 
tion in favor of that active participation 

4 ; 


- 


‘fully into prawtice? 


in world affa:rs which is not only in 
keeping with: our military and eco- 
nomic power but which must also be 
the key to world peace and prosperity. 

Fortunately, this time there is little 
dangér that a hostile Senate will reject 
the plan. For the whole alliance was 
first proposed by Senator Vandenberg, 
the acknowledged Republican spokes- 
man on foreign affairs, as far back as 
Jan. 10, 1945, Had it been adopted 
earlier, much of the present tragedy in 
Europe might: have been averted, It is 
not too late, however, to rectify past 
mistakes. Th? bipartisan sponsorship 
of the allianc> guarantees that Amer- 
ica will stand behind it. 


——EEEEEEEEE 


THE PALESTINE REPORT 


In the last analysis there is one test 
which alone can determine the sound- 
ness or the lack of soundness in the 
recommendations made by the report 
of the Joint Anglo-American Commis- 
sion on Palestine. This is the test of 
experience. VVill the two Governments 
which created the commission accept 
all of its findings and sponsor all of 
its principal proposals? If so, can they 
find, both within Palestine itself and 
in the great outside world for which 
Palestine is 2 hope, a vision or a 
symbol, enouxh popular support to 
put these refommendations success- 
We do not know 
the answers to these questions. But 
we believe that however wide the di- 
versity of opinion with which the re- 
port may be received and however deep 
the disappoint ment which certain parts 
of it may arduse, the authors of the 
report are entitled to have it believed 
that they have acted in complete good 
faith. We speak particularly of the 
American members because they are 
best known to us. Conspicuous in this 
group are men with independent minds 
who have given generously of their 
time and energy to many humanitarian 
causes. In their present effort to help 
solve a problem which successive Brit- 
ish Governments have found insoluble 
for a quarter of a century, we take 
their good faith for granted. 

The most immediately important rec 
ommendation in the report is that 
which calls for the issuance of 100,000 
certificates for the admission to Pales- 
tine of Jewish: refugees who have been 
the victims of Nazi and Fascist perse- 
cution—these ¢ertifiaates to be awarded 
as far as possible during the present 
year and actual immigration to be 
begun at once and pushed vigorously. 
This recommendation flies in the face 
of strong Arab protests. It may at 
first thought raise doubts in some 
minés regarding the physical ability of 
Palestine to solve the refugee problem. 
@ut that problem is so acute, in terms 
of widespread, poignant human suffer- 
ing, that Arab opposition must be met 
squarely and overcome. And to those 
who argue thst Palestine alone cannot 
meet the need, the commission's reply 
is that it agrees with this appraisal; 
that it is fully aware of the limitations 
of space and the enormity of the pres- 
sure; that it believes other Govern- 
ments and other nations must help to 
find pew homes for those so tragically 
indexed as “Cisplaced persons,” irre- 
spective of creed or nationality; but 
that there is no other place to which 
the great majority of those of Jewish 
faith can go immediately, except Pales- 
tine, which is where “almost all of them 
want to go.” We strongly support this 
recommendati-n of the commission, and 
bespeak for it, in the event of its adop- 
tion, the generous support through 
UNRRA and other public and private 
agencies which so great a mass move- 
ment of people will need and ought to 
have. 

The second major recommendation 
in the report looks ahead to the longer 
future, and does so from a point of 
view which wiil undoubtedly meet with 
criticism on the part of many of those, 
in this country and elsewhere, who 
have long wisled and worked to create 
in Palestine a Jewish state. For the 
report draws a distinction between a 
Jewish National Home and a Jewish 
state, pledging support for the first, 
denying the practicability of the sec- 
ond, “The National Home is there. Its 
roots are deep in the soil of Palestine. 
It cannot be argued out of existence. 
*** It has a right to continued ex- 
istence, protection and development.” 
But this development, in the commis- 
sion’s view, cannot and should not lead, 
either on the grounds of expediency or 
of justice, to ‘the establishment of a 
Jewish state, or, in future years, to a 
policy of forced immigration to attain 
this end. “Palestine is not and never 
can be a purely Jewish land. It lies at 
the crossroads of the Arab world. Its 
Arab population, descended from long- 
time inhabitants of the area, rightly 
look upon Palestine as their homeland. 
It is, therefore, neither just nor prac- 
ticable that Falestine should become 
either an Arab state, in which an Arab 
majority would control the destiny of 
a Jewish minority, or a Jewish state 
in which a Jewish majority would con- 
trol that of an Arab minority. * * * 
Thus Palestine must ultimately become 
a state which guards the rights and 
interests of Moslems, Jews and Chris- 
tians alike.” This appraisal of the sit- 
uation has always seemed to us a sound 
one. 

To achieve its purposes, the commis- 
sion recommends that Palestine be 
placed under trusteeship of the United 
Nations, with the present mandate to 
be continued until such time as an 
agreement of this kind has been exe- 
cuted. It recommends, “in the inter- 
ests of the conciliation of the two 
peoples,” the reformation of the educa- 
tional system of both Jews and Arabs, 
in order to restrain the present empha- 
sis on nationalism. It recommends the 
development, under public auspices, of 
large-scale agricultural and industrial 
projects which “could not only greatly 
enlarge the capacity of the country to 
support an increasing population but 
also raise the living standards of Jew 
and Arab alike.” It recommends “po- 
litical peace” as a necessary prelim- 
inary to such developments. 

Surely this ia a wise judgment. “Po- 
litical peace” is essential to both groups 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 


| in Palestine, no less than to the out- 


side world. It is a prerequisite to the 
ability of the land itself to give suste- 
nance to more of the unhappy thou- 
sands who now stand outside its nar- 
row gates, eager for a chance to start 
life afresh. 


MRS. ROOSEVELT’S COMMISSION 


Three representatives, from Russia, 
Yugoslavia and China, expressed the 
sentiment of many millions of people 
on Monday when they chose Mrs. 
Franklin D. Roosevelt as chairman of 
the United Nations Commission on 
Human Rights, a subsidiary of the 
Economic and Social Council. The 
other five members, who were not 
present when the Commission's first 
session came to order, are not expected 
to object. No one can question Mrs. 
Roosevelt's ardent interest in every- 
thing that can conceivably come under 
this new agency's scope. 

The Scope is broad. The Commission 
will be entrusted with the duty of max- 
ing “recommendations for the purpose 
of promoting respect for, and observ- 
ance of, human rights and fundamental 
freedoms for all.” Its members might 


be puzzled as to just where to begin. | 


| 
| 


lark on such a morning, on account of 
daylight saving, will yield to the in- 
fluences of the season he cannot avoid 
some good-will, toward the world in 
general, even toward his | next-door 
neighbors. May it be so torlay. 


Topics of The Times 


New York City’s new 
Home Term Court, which 
opens today in: # chintz- 
draped setting, reties strong- 
ly on atgnosphere for the 
settlement of family disputes. In that 
respect it is on sound ground, certainly, 
because it is when the domeéstic scene 
ceases to be homelike that the union 
begins to go on the rocks. 

Everything about this new court sug- 
gests the home. There is 4 nursery, 
with cribs, dolls and playthings, where 
youngsters can be taken care of while 
the court is trying to settle the quarrel 
between the elders. A kitchen is at 
hand to prepare a snack in case there 
is a slight delay. The atmosphere is 
so attractive, in fact, that there would 
appear to be some danger, in the midst 
of the current housing shortage, that 
Magistrate Kross may find squatters 


New 
Kind 
of Court 


Actually they will have no power save | on her hands. 


that of influencing public opinion, 
through the medium of published facts. 
Yet, if an adequate staff is provided, 
this can be a very great power. In the 
world we hope to see, no gross abuges 
of human dignity and freedom will go 
unnoticed, no matter where they occur. 
The machinery exists to bring them :o 
attention, and the conscience of man- 
kind can be the coercive agent. Mus. 
Roosevelt's Commission, when it gets 
down to work, will set precedents. So 
far as her influence runs, we can be 
sure they will be humane and helpful 
precedents. 


HOUSING FOR U. N. 


An ideal solution of the housing 
shortage in so far as it affects the per- 
sonnel of the United Nations seems ‘o 
have been found in the announced plans 
for a garden village midway between 
the Administration Building on the od 
World's Fair site and the U. N. office 
quarters in the Sperry plant on Lake 
Success. If U. N. sanctions the ar- 
rahgement, private enterprise, financed 
by a group of banks, would ruth 
through a modern development of 171 
duplex dwellings in the triangle of 
Queens farmland carved out by Unicn 


| 


This new apprcach to set- 
tling* family disturbances 
that stop short of felony 
comes most opportunely, 
because the end of a war 
also means, for a great many, the end 
of a marriage. 

Reno had a record year for divorces 
in 1945, with 8,590 cases, about 1,500 
more than in the previous year. Phila- 
delphia’s decrees reached an all-time 
high. At the end of last year petitions 
in New Jersey were averaging 160 a 
a week; for every six marriages in 1944 
there was a suit for divorce, and the 
rate wag rising. 

The situation in New York City was 
recently called “horrifying” by Justice 
Walsh of the Supreme Court, who said 
that while 74,069 marriages were per- 
formed here in 1945, there were 8,301 
actions to dissolve the marriage bond | 
or hold the marriage a nullity. This/| 
meant one lawsuit for every nine | 
marriages. 


Serious 
Problem 
Now 


We are not alone, as a 
nation, in this breakdown 
of the happy marriage. In 
France more than 19,000 
couples were divorced in 


Like 
Condition 
Abroad 


Turnpike and Grand Central and Par- 1945, a rise of 10,000 above the last 


sons Boulevards. The 550 apartments pre-war year. 


Divorce cases recently 


should be ready for occupancy early were flooding German courts at a rate 
next spring by at least 2,000 U. N.| Said to be ten times higher than in 


employes and their families. 

Old-timers who remember when this 
tract was the former Creed estate farm, 
which contributed many sleek carriage 
horses and fine hunters to the then 
leisurely pace of Long Island life, will 
rub their eyes to see this cosmopolitan 
community, brought into being by a 
new world, spring up in the heart of a 
newly world-conscious city. It will ai- 
most adjoin the pleasant communiti 
of Forest Hilis and Kew Gardeng and 
will match in all respects their high 
standards of construction. It could not 
be more conveniently located, for it ‘s 
only a six-minute drive from the U. N. 
Assembly Hall and only six miles from 
the Sperry plant, with excellent transit 
facilities in both directions, 

The proposed development, the plans 
for which have already been approved 
by Secretary General Trygve Lie for 
the United Nations and by Mayor 
O’Dwyer for the city, aims primarily 
to take care of an emergency which 
will last for at least three years and 
perhaps for five. U. N., of course, must 
guarantee the rentals, which are ex- 
pected ‘to be fairly high because of ac- 
celerated building pressure involving 
much overtime. If the United Nations 
organization decides to remain in New 
York, this village of many nations will 
provide comfortable housing for its 
employes. If U. N. decides to seek an- 
other permanent site, the group of 
“personalized colonial” apartments, 
modern and attractively landscz ped, 
will be easily rentable. Construction 
Coordinator Moses appears to have 
worked out a double-barreled, sel*- 
liquidating plan which should meet any 
test. 


THE DAY WE CELEBRATE 


May Day is traditionally a spring 
festival, perhaps traceable back to the 
third century B. C., possibly even fur- 
ther back to ancient goings-on in In- 
dia, Egypt and Britain. In the church 
calendar it is the feast day of St. 
James the Lesser and St. Philip. In 
American history it is the anniversary 
of Dewey's victory at Manila Bay, and 
it has also been set aside in this coun- 
try as Child Health Day. It is the day 
when oysters are thought to become 
inedible, though with modern quick 
freezing devices it may lose this dis- 
tinction, and it is also the day when 
left-wing groups parade in honor of 
whatever sort of brave new world they 
happen to fancy. 

One would not sneer at the paraders, 
or at anyone else who today feels the 
stir of spring and hope. One just 
hopes that the tradition of May Day 
disturbances, upheavals, clashes and 
recriminations will be honored only by 
non-observance. As we go to press 
the weather is too fine for hard feel- 
ings of any kind. We like to think of 
little girls dancing around Maypoles 
with flowers in their hair. We like to 
think of women’s new hats, which this 
year are on the flowery side. We like 
to think of blossoming trees, of tulips 
and other posies, of grass seed sprout- 
ing, still undaunted by summer's 
drought and weeds, of frogs perform- 
ing in the meadows and birds among 
the branches, of letting the furnace go 
out and our souls expand. 

Love blooms in May, in these lati- 
tudes, though June is considered a 
luckier month for marriage. It would 
be very pleasant if good-will also 
bloomed—if less dramatic than love, it 
is perhaps harder to achieve and somé 
might say more important. If a nor- 
mal human being, arising with the 


1932. Some 30,000 divorces were grant- 
ed in 1945 in England and Wales; thirty 
years before it had been 1,413. 
Whatever the attitude toward divorce, 
there appears to be little question that 
ease of cbtaining it has an accelerative 
effect on the number of suits. Some 
striking figures have lately come out 
of Russia. Under old law, registrars 
could issue divorces at the request of 
either party. During sixteen months 
after the divorce process was made 
public and turned over to the courts 
divorces showed a decline of two-thirds. 


A sharp distinction must 
be drawn in any realistic 
appraisal of the divorce 
problem between the rea- 
sons for the break-up of a 
home and the grounds given in court. 
These seldom coincide. A Chicago di- 
vorce court judge says, for instance, 
that one current reason for the dissolu- 
tion of families is the inability to find 
housing. We assume this would not be 
legal grounds in any court in the land, 
but it is easy to understand how the 
strain of living in inadequate quarters, 
or in the makeshift home with rela- 
tives of the wife or husband would gen- 
erate unhappiness. 

This Chicago judge, Erwin A. Rob- 
son, estimates that liquor plays a part 
in 60 per cent of the divorces in Cook 
County. His statistics give that county 
what must be a record among Amer- 
ican large cities, one divorce to every 
three marriages in 1945. In groping 
for a possible solution he suggests a 
central advisory agency composed of 
clergymen, physicians, lawyers, educa- 
tors and social service workers for cou- 
ples to consult, a method which bears 
some similarity to the principle on 
which Manhatthn'’s new Home Term 
Court will operate. 


Reasons 
for 
Divorce 


People do a great deal 
of talking about the home 
as a bulwark of society, 
but we have through the 
years done far too little of- 
ficially to hold the home together. The 
divorces keep increasing, the courts 
grow busier. There {s too little time, 
with new cases crowding the docket, to 
look behind the legal basis for the suit 
to try to determine the human problem 
that lies behind it. 

It will be interesting to watch the 
results obtained in our new court, 
where a more leisurely approach to the 
domestic argument may be possible; 
where the trained social worker can sit 
down in quiet surroundings, free from 
the tension of the formal courtroom, 
and hear both sides. This is not a di- 
vorce court. It is the court that—-un- 
leas wisdom intervenes—may precede 
the divorce court, In it, as Chief Mag- 
istrate Bromberger. says, “if we suc- 
ceed in re-establishing family tranquil- 
lity and restoring a proper atmasphere 
in only a fraction of these thousands of 
cases, we shall have contributed ma- 
terially to the welfare and happiness 
of the community and to the preserva- 
tion of proper influences for the chil- 
dren of those families.” 


SEs 
TO ST. FRANCIS 


Wherever crab will lurch afoam, 
Whenever sparrows knit their home, 
Whatever song the cricket sings, 
O poet of God's courtesy, 
You find His love in little things! 
I pray your song be ever free 
Gently to sing His love immense, 
His kind munificence. 

RAy BERNaAgD, 8. J. 


Taking 
the 
Trouble 


1946. 


Abroad 


Mr. Byrnes Challenges the 
Peacemakers 


By ANNE O'HARE MecCORMICK 


Secretary Byrnes has brought the 
million-dollar question into the open. 
Is security the primary aim of Russian 


| policy? Every move around the vast 


periphery of the Red empire, from Man- 
churia and Korea to Iran and from the 
Mediterranean through eastern Europe 
to the Baltic, is explained as a neces- 
sary step toward surrounding the So- 
viet Union with friendly neighbors. 
Russia argues that she must enlarge 
her sphere of influence to insure her- 
self against a recrudescent militarism 
in Germany and Japan, or (to the Rus- 
sian people) against “capitalist encir- 
clement.” France demands a new re- 
gime in the Rhineland and the Ruhr 
as a protection against future German 
aggression. 

All right, says Mr. Byrnes; let's dis- 
pose of these fears by signing a four- 
power treaty of alliance binding all of 
us for twenty-five years, or longer, to 
keep Germany disarmed. Then we can 
proceed to make a European peace on 
the assumption that that danger is 
eliminated. Likewise, he added in ef- 
fect, we can start from the premise 
that the United States is in Europe to 
stay. 

This is a direct challenge to the 
peacemakers, It strengthens the repu- 
tation the Secretary of State is acquir- 
ing for taking the initiative in inter- 
national policy. First he insists that 
the Foreign Ministers must get togeth- 
er and begin work on the draft treaties 
without further delay. Then, when 
they are assembled, he loses no time in 
laying on the table, and publishing to 
the world, a definite and, as far as the 


| United Stat@ is concerned, a revolu- 


tionary proposal for « military alliance 
designed to lay the German specter for 
a@ generation, and al) the excuses for 
unilateral action that hide behind it. 

The most interesting aspect of the 
Byrnes proposal is that it is not new. 
One gcod reason for including Senator 
Vandenberg in the Paris delegation is 
that he sponsored a similar treaty in 
January, 1945. But his statement at 
that time, important as it is in prom- 
isit.g Republican support for a drastic 
departure from our traditional policy, 
was not an official declaration, and is 
not so significant as the fact that Mr. 
Byrnes discussed the treaty with Stalin 
in Mos:ow last Deceriber and that the 
text has been in the hands of all the 
Governments concerned since early 
February. 

This throws light on much that has 
happened since. Washington began to 
take a strong line toward Russia only 
after this offer had been received in 
Moscow. Before the Security Council 
met in New York, before the Russians 
moved to sew up the economic monop- 
olies in the border states that worry 
this Government because they mort- 
gage the settlements, the Soviet Gov- 
ernment knew that the United States 
was ready to enter a pact to protect 
Russia's frontiers from any possible 
German aggression. This renders 
pretty silly the current talk that Rus- 
sia's policy is based on doubts of our 
intentions, fears of an Anglo-American 
bloc against her or suspicions of a plot 
to build up German military power. 
Since the American proposal was first 
circulated, there is n> excuse for this 
mistrust. 

There will be less excuse now that 
the offer is publicized. It was a mas- 


Letters to The Times 


Citizenship for Guamians 


Delay in Legislative Action Needs 


Correction, It Is Said 
To Tye Eprtor or Tus New York Tims: 

Last June Mr. Joseph R. Farrington, 
Delegate in Congress from Hawaii, .n- 
troduced H. R. 3528, to confer United 
States citizenship upon the natives of 
Guam. It is understood that hearings 
will shortly be held by the House Com- 
mittee on Immigration and Naturali- 
zation, to which this bill has been 
referred, on the subject. It was partic- 
ularly fitting that Delegate Farrington, 
who represents another group of 
Pacific islanders in Congress, should 
have sponsored this legislation. 

When, some time back, legislation 
was introduced into Congress to com- 
pensate the Guamians for the damage 
inflicted upon their homes and cities 
by our returning forces, Mr. H. Struve 
Hensel, then Assistant Secretary of the 
Navy, said: 

“The affairs of Guam have been ad- 


ministered in the interests of the naval 


station and the native inhabitants have 
been considered wards of the Navy. 
Thus, the United States has a definite 
responsibility to protect the inhabi- 
tants of the island. The Japanese in- 
vasion and occupation resulted in 
extensive damage to private property 
on the island. Further damage resulted 
from our reconquest. Aga result of the 
two periods of combat and the actions 
of the Japanese occupying force during 
the interim, the people of Guam have 
suffered extensively. * * * The good- 
will of the islanders toward the Navy 
was responsible for no smali part of 
the comparative ease with which re- 
conquest took place and, moreover, was 
responsible for many of the difficulties 
of the Japanese on the island. * * *” 


It is surely no part of the gratitude | 
of a great nation for the bill conferring | 


citizenship on the Guamians to have 
been bottled up in the Committee on 
Immigration and Naturalization for 
almost a year without any action at 


all. Such a disregard for the interests | 


of people who have been loyal Ameri- 
cans, and who have made greater sacri- 
fices than many of our people at home, 
is not compatible with the concepts of 
the United Nations which we are today 
seeking to translate into reality. Fair | 
dealing, like charity, begins at home, | 
and we should take the necessary | 
measures to redress the situation of | 
the Guamians before we intervene in 
the problems of Iran, India and Indo- 
nesia. It is hoped that THE TIMES and | 
its readers will urge upon the Commit- | 
tee of Immigration and Naturalization 
the necessity of full hearings and swift | 
action on this laudable legislation. 

One further word. Secretary Hen- 
sel's comment that “the affairs of | 
Guam have been administered in the | 
interests of the naval station and the | 
native inhabitants have been considered | 
wards of the Navy” has been the key- 
stone of our entire policy toward Guam 
for almost half a century. In a mis- 
guided belief that the needs of the 
Navy required the island to be sealed 
off from the world, we have made it 
a sort of Forbidden City, and have 
arrested its economic and political de- 
velopment, in sharp contrast to the 
manner in which the neighboring is- 
lands of Saipan and Tinian were de- 
veloped by the Japanese. The enact- 
ment of legislation making the Guam- 
jans American citizens should be not 
only the payment of a great debt which 
we owe them. It should be the first 
step toward the full economic and po- 


ter stroke of diplomacy on the part of litical development of the island, and | 


Mr. Byrnes to tell the world about the 
proposel at the moment he asked to 
have it placed on the agenda of the 
conference. If the United States is 
willing to sign such an agreement, na- 
tions Whose security is more directly 
menaced by the German war poten- 
tial cannot very well refuse. While it 
wag a secret they might ignore it or 
postpone action, but in public they 
have to say or do something. 

The proposal is more than a bold 
move to make our position clear and 
allay fsars and suspicions invoked to 
justify selfish policies. It recognizes 
that the German problem has to be 
dealt with in any realistic approach 
to a European settlement. The ques- 
tion of the Ruhr cannot be intelli- 
gently discussed until the powers re- 
sponsibie for the peace agree on a plan 
to keep peace in Germany. A quad- 
ripartite control of German disarma- 
ment, offering France the guarantee 
she way refused after the First World 
War, is bound to influence the French 
attitudé on the boundary question. It 
is bourid to influence the attitude of 
all Eurppean states toward every other 
decision. 

The disintegration of Europe is the 
greates! single cause of anxiety to the 
makers of our foreign policy. They are 
gravely disturbed by conditions in Ger- 
many and their spreading repercus- 
sions. .Mr. Byrnes’ proposal is the 
product: of this anxiety. It is advanced 
as an a'ternative to the division of Eu- 
rope, for it is already clear that par- 
tition is a prescription for ruin and 
perpetual conflict. A long-term guard 
over Germany would hold the Big Four 
togethers, it is hoped, and create confi- 
dence jn their cooperation, on which 
peace Gepends. ; 

The proposed treaty would work for 
the advantage of Germany also. A 
strict and continuysus supervision 
backed by force to maintain complete 
demiliterization would be the most 
practical method to reduce the occu- 
pying srmies, shorten the occupation 
and thereby break up the zone system 
which is blocking and hardening the 
arteries not only of Germany but of 
the whole Continent. A Germany mili- 
tarily impotent and economically self- 
supporting is the best hope of order in 
Europe, and it is because this has be- 
come the objective of American policy 
that the American delegation has of- 
fered a solution which Washington be- 
lieves would make the German prob- 
lem manageable. 

ae 


the establishment of some measure of | 
self-government. 
RICHARD H. WELS. 
New York, April 27, 1946. 


Coast Guard Praised 


New Jersey Representative States Need 
For Its Services 


To Tus Eprror or Taz New York Tiuas: 

I was very much interested to read 
the editorial “The Coast Guard,” in 
THe TIMES on April 25, because this is 
a subject which has been very close to 
my heart, and to which I have been 
giving considerable thought and atten- 
tion. 

As I represent the New Jersey coast 
running from Sandy Hook to a few 
miles north of Atlantic City, I am well 
aware of the excellent_services which 
the Coast Guard has always rendered 
the people along the coast, and they 
have become so accustomed to it and 
dependent on it that naturally they 
consider it in the light of an indispen- 
sable service. During the coming sea- 
son there will be many small craft 
employed in fishing offshore which 
will need the protection of the Coast 
Guard, and it would be a terrible thing 
if disaster should overtake them with 
no help at hand. 

With this in view and after consult- 
ing with the Commandant of the Coast 
Guard, I have drafted a bill which I 
shall introduce as soon as the Congress 
regonvenes, It will authorize the Coast 
Guard, under regulations prescribed by 
the Secretary of the Treasury, to enlist 
not more than 2,000 men for a period 
of six months for service at lifeboat 
stations within the continental limits 
of the United States, and these re- 
cruits will be accepted only from pre- 
vious members of the Coast Guard 
who have had experience. 

I am hopeful that prompt action may 
be secured on this measure because it 
is for the protection of our citizens, and 
I heartily endorse‘ your statement that 
“a pinchpenny budget is not deserved 
by the Coast Guard.” 

JAMES C. AUCHINCLOaS, M. C. 


Use for Alr Warden Funds 
To Tus Eprtor or Tus New Yorx Times: 
The former Air Warden Service did 
a fine job during the war. Many of the 
units still have unused funds in their 
treasuries. There cannot be a worthier 
cause than to donate these funds to the 


Greater New York Fund. One of our 
posts donated $220 last week. Another 
will send $120. Let all zones, sectors 
}and posts of the former Air Warden 
Service act now I. F. SHERMAN, 
Former Sector Commander. 
Brooklyn, April 29, 1946. 


Personal Touch Possible 
Suggestions Are Given for Securing 
Names of Families Abroad 
| To Tus Korror or Tus New YorxK Times: 
| Recently you published a letter from 
Caroline Kaufherr requesting informa- 
tion as to names of specific families in 
Europe to whom she and others might 

send food parcels. 

There are many groups which will 
give individual names and addresses, 
if one will write for them. For in- 
stance, to mention but a few: Ameri- 
can Relief for Italy, American Relief 
for Poland, American Relief for Hol- 
|jand. There are groups for other coun- 
tries also and, in addition, there is an 
organization known as C. A. R. E., Co- 
operative for American Remittances to 
Europe, which is made up of some 
| twenty-four agencies. All of the fore- 
going have offices in New York. Then, 
j;of course, there is the American 
Friends Service Committee at 20 South 
| Twelfth Street, Philadelphia. 

Certainly the personal touch is of 
| value, and, while the peoples abroad 
need everything we can send them, it is 
even more helpful in aiding any family 
to know exactly what items are longed 
for or are of importance to their ex- 
istence. ELIZABETH BENTLEY. 

New York, April 25, 1946. 





Help for French Children 

| To Tus Eorror or Tus New Yorx Times: 

Here is an answer to the letter of 
|Caroline Kaufherr in your issue of 
April 20, asking “How does one go 
about finding an organization that can 
supply names and addresses of specific 
needy Europeans?” American Relief 
‘for France Headquarters at 39 East 
| Thirty-sixth Street in this city, has the 
|/names and addresses of thousands of 
|French children who need help. Every 
child's background is recorded in this 


| information received directly from 


| France after it has been carefully veri- 
| fied by French social service organiza- 
tions on the spot. 

A child can be “adopted,” simply by 
promising to send him or her two 
packages of food or clothing per 
month, for six months or a year. Cor- 
respondénce with the children or with 
older members of their families is an 
essential part of the plan, and Ameri- 
cans cooperating in the ARF child- 
package program have ‘already re- 
ceived many touching letters of grati- 
tude, as well as specific suggestions 
as to what the particular child needs 
most. Thus an eminently personal 
relationship is established. 

GHORGETTE PERKINS, 

Deputy Director Overseas Division. 

New York, April 22, 1946. 


Czechoslovakians Aided 
To THS Korror or Tus New Yorx Traces: 

The letter in THE TIMES of April 20 
from Caroline Kaufherr in reference 
to the desirability of personal contacts 
between donors of food parcels and 
their recipients overseas is fully justi- 
fied: These families are not only 
hungry for food, but friendly words of 
encouragement through correspondence 
are also very necessary and would have 
@ psychological effect on those receiv- 
ing them. 

Our office has over 1,600 names and 
addresses of families whose men were 
executed by the Nazis or tortured to 
death. Any interested person may se- 
cure the name and address of a family 
from us, at 8 West Fortieth Street. 

Ruza L. STUERM, 
American Friends of Czechoslovakia. 
New York, April 27, 1946. 


Stone Anecdote Recalled 
To Tus Eprtor or Tus New Yoru Tixus: 

In your excellent obituary of Chief 
Justice Harlan F. Stone you mention 
the fact that when Stone was nomi- 
nated as associate justice of the Unit- 
ed States Supreme Court in 1925, the 
late Senator George W. Norris opposed 
the nomination. Norris associated 
Stone with luxury and monopoly be- 
cause he was a partner in the law firm 
of Satterlee, Canfield & Stone; and 
Satterlee was a son-in-law of J. Pier- 
pont Morgan. 

You should, I think, have related 
also that when, in 1941, Stone was 
nominated as Chief Justice of the 
United States, Senator Norris mani- 
feated his characteristic sincerity and 
honesty by declaring to his colleagues: 
“Mr. President, the nomination by the 
President of Mr, Justice Stone to be- 
come Chief Justice of the United States 
is a very proper and commendable reec- 
ognition of the ability, courage and 
wisdom of Mr. Justice Stone, who has 
served as associate justice of the Su- 
preme Court for quite a number - of 
years. When Mr. Stone was appointed 
an asnociate justice of the United 
States Supreme Court, many years 
ago, I opposed the confirmation of his 
nomination and voted against it. In 
the years that have passed I became 
convinced, and am now convinced, that 
in my opposition to the confirmation 
of his nomination I was antirely in 
error. I am now about to perform one 
of the most pleasant duties that has 
ever come to me in my official life 
when I cast a vote in favor of his ele- 
vation to the highest judicial office im 
our land.” 

To eat crow in public is not gener 
ally considered a pleasant activity; but 
George Norris was sincerely grateful 
for the opportunity publicly to right « 
wrong he had committed. Both he and 
Stone always acted by the best light 
available to them, and did not hesitate 
to reverse themselves when new facta 
and urgent considerations compelled 
their honest minds to do so. Both rose 
above party, class and caste. 

MILTON R. Konvits. 

New York, April 25, 1946. 

+ 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


B. W. FLEISHER, 76, 
RAN TOKYO PAPER 


Ex-Publisher of Advertiser Is 
Dead—Overcame Hardships 
to. Build Up Far East Daily 


DR. LILTENTHAL, 85, 
SURGEON, IS DEAD 


Former Head of American 
Thoracic Surgery Group 
Had Practiced 59 Years 


in health, and with the intimida 
tion campaign stronger than ever, 
Mr. Fleisher sold the paper for 
$100,000 to Goh, who merged it 
with The Japan Times and Mail, 
which ke forthe Japanese For- 
eign Office. 


GEORGE T. HEPBRON 


Official of National Basketball 
Committee 18 Years Dies 


Special to Tus New Yoax Tixces, 
NEWARK, N. J., April 30— 
George T. Hepbron of 146 North 
Grove St., East Orange, long a na- 
tional figure in basketball, former- 
ly for eighteen years secretary of 


West Seventy-seventh Street, a 
Sinai Hospital since 1892, as con- 
Sinai Hospital Unit in France in 
Center after a long illness. He was 
Lilienthal and the former® Jennie 
in 1883, his M. D. in 1887. That Triumphed Over Vicissitudes 
ae a Ee By ene D. OP P ENHEIMER, most influential English: 
daily newspaper in 
a@ surgeon on the staff of Bellevue trium 
the prin 
A former president of the Amer- was forced in 1940 to sell 
been president of the New York at Beth Israel Is Dead—Won than it was worth. eget 
geon general, 1936, of the Military B. Fleisher and the late Mrs. 
my of Medicine, and a member of heimer, a fellow of the American|o¢ Pennsylvania in 1889. His fa- 
fraternity. He leaves a widow, his|pitals, died yesterday of heart|/Mr. Fleisher worked for ‘hat firm. 
daughter, Mrs. Thompson Law-| Associated with Beth Israel/his personal fortune fh stock mar- 
Dr. Lilienthal the author of/ Cancer nic on Welfare Island, ag ge stopped at Yokohama. 
articles in professional journals./charge of general medicine, pedia-|thur M. Knapp, a former mission- 
in the art exhibitions of the New| For twelve years the chief ortho-|newspaper business and, to see it 
- care been on the staffs of Mount Sinaija month. 
MARTIN A. WHITE, 73, 
tal. | 
Special to Tue New Yorx Traces. lege of Physicigns and Surgeons of|#i0ns totaled $750 the first month 
tion and assistant to the chairman)jated subjects abroad. a month, with no commissions. At 
evening in his apartment. His age|pattalion medical officer with the|T!0d of five years to pay off the 
White had been genera! news editor] his duties near the front. Tokyo. 
about fifteen years ago and came/had developed, a medal was|f Journaliam visited Japan in 
Born at Waukegan, Ill, Mr.| American Academy of Orthopedic} 1949, whereby some of the school’s 
He Jeaves a widow, Mrs. Nana|Orthopedic Surgery and a member| 1" 1940 he refused an offer from 
Bailey, also of Cornwall Bridge; a)East Nimety-sixth Street. ~ ism, including the arrest of many 
J. White of Chicago. three sons, David E., Edgar D. and 
career extended over more than pabiboeeeie 
transferred to The Associated 
its general news editor was for Greated Trilby Role in U. &. 
“midnight M. E, 8.” since his du- tress in this country at the turn of 
signed during the day with the! Seventy-second Street. She was 
in 1931, Mr. White resigned twice, first to E. H. Sothern, noted 
King Features Syndicate and Uni- Courtenay, to whom she was wed|ine National Mccmethal ‘Comat. 
Mrs. King, under the name of Miss Harned’s first stage appear-|\." the Presbyterian Hospital at 
MISS CLARA VANDERHOVEN company’s version of “Our Board-|nasketball referee in New York, 
“False Shame.” Basketball Guides, a member of 
Special to Tax New Youx Tocss. the New York stage in “A Lostichairman of several physical edu- 
Street, the owner of extensive real|in “The Maister of Wood wW."|ter, E. Adele Hepbron, and two 
hoven, who for many years was|much attention from critics and 
Rahway Memorial Hospital in her|Trilby in this country in the first Former Head of Glens Fails 
Rahway, Miss Vanderhoven was|part during a long run of the pro- 
GLENS FALLS, N. Y., April 30 


Dr. Howard Lilienthal of 20 
specialist in thoracic surgery who 
had been on the staff of Mount 
sulting surgeon since 1924, and 
was medica] director of the Mount 
the first World War, died yester- 
day in the Jursey City Medical 
85 years old. 
Born in Albany, a son of Meyer 
Marcus, Dr. Lilienthal received his 
A. B. from Harvard, cum laude,| )R. EDGAR D. OPPENHEIMER |**"™*™ 
autumn he established his home in 
New York, and the next year he Mr. See eee tt ete the 
Polyclinic Medical School and Hos- 
pital. In 1909 he was appointed SURGEON WAS 69 icissitud 
Hospital, becoming a consultant j incl two fires which destroyed 
some yoars later. finally 
Surgery, Dr. Lilienthal had also tion 
: : elphia, Mr. Fieish- 
County Medical Society, and of the) Award for New Techniques | 30rm in Philad 
New York Surgical Society; sur- q er was the son of the late Simon 
, War. H _|Cecelia Hoffheimer Fleisher. He 
e Fellow ate Hee York Acade- Dr. Edgar Davidson OPPen-|was graduated from the University 
various medical groups, the Ameri-|College of Surgeons and consult-|ther was the founder of the Fleish- 
can Legion and Beta Theta Piling orthopedist at several hos-|er Yarn Company and for a time 
second wife, who wax Edith Strode!disease at his home at 1148 Fifth)After a nervous breakdown and 
at their marriage in 1911, and a|Avenue. He was 62 years of age.|the loss of a considerable part of 
rence, by his first wife, the late|Hospital, Hillside Hospital in Ja-jket speculation, Mr. Fleisher, in 
Mary d’Antignac Lilienthal. maica, eens, and the City/1907, went on a round-the-world 
“Imperative Surgery” and ‘Tho-|he was also chairman of the e Japan Advertiser was then 
racic Surgery;” and more than 300|/medical board of consultants inja small newspaper owned by Ar- 
Painting was one of his hobbies,/trics and surgery for the Jewish|ary who had turned atheist. Mr. 
and pictures by him were shown/Child Care Association. Fleisher became interested in the 
York Physicians Club at the Acad-|pedic surgeon of Beth Israel, Dr./from within, went to work on The 
emy of Medicine. Oppenheimer had at various times|Advertiser as a reporter for $25 
Hospital, Montefiore Hospital and 
the Elizabeth (N. J.) General Hos- > aang a 
‘ was % 
FTC AIDE, EX-EDITOR P He was born in New York ing advertising. He began work- 
nn and was graduated from the Col- ing for commissions. His commis- 
WASHINGTON, April 30—Mar-|Columbia University. He continued|#24¢ 80on thereafter he became the 
tin A. White, director of informa-|the study of orthopedics and re-|P®Per s business manager at $175 
of the Federal Trade Commission,| During the first World War Dr.|‘he end of the fifth month he be- 
died here of a heart attack this penheimer served overseas as & came the papers owner, with a pe- 
was 73 ‘Mount Sinai Base Hospital and|PUrchase price. He soon move 
Formerly a newspaper man, Mr.|was wounded while carrying out|*he paper from Yokohama to 
of The Associated Press in New| In recognition of new techn’ ques When Dean Walter Williams of 
York. He resigned this position| in wunnt ae treatment that he the University of Missouri School 
Tashi |1914 he mad 
to Washington eight years ago to|awarded to Dr. nheimer at made an arrangement with 
work for the Government. lthe annual pot 5 von of the Mr. Fleisher, carried out until 
White began his writing career on|Surgeons in 1932. He was a di- ~~ graduates were sent to The 
The Chicago Tribune in 1895. |plomate of the American Board of|A@vertiser as reporters. 
Springer White of Cornwall Bridge,/of the New York’ Academy of|* J@panese, Toshi Goh, of $50,000 
Conn.; @ daughter, Mrs. Merrell B.|Modicinec His office was at 2/f0F the paper. Systematic terror- 
son, John Springer White of Hunt-| He leaves a widow, the former Japanese employes of the paper on 
ington, L. 1., and a brother, Thomas!Carolyn Weil of this city, and|‘*lse charges, followed. In the fall 
—_— Frank W., all of whom are still 
5 active newspaper! on active duty with the Navy. 
forty years. After beginning with 
The Chicago Tribune in 1895, he MISS VIRGINIA HARNED 
Press in 1908, and after his rise to| Actress, Once Wife of Sothern,| 
many years known familiarly to pompinete 
employes of the wire service as the Virginia “Harned, a leading ac- 
ties involved the signing of office 
memoranda and orders which were sn Deendnd ox han hamnal nal Wank 
initials of Melville E. Stone, head/ 
’ 74 years old, 
of the organization. Miss Harned had been married 
from The Associated Press to be- 
actor, from whom she was later 
come assistant general manager of divorced, and later to William 
versal S i 
a — ® position he held secretly in 1913. Both Mr. Sothern tee and its predecessor, the Joint 
and Mr. Courtenay died in 1933. |Rules Committee, died here today 
Adele Garrison, is a writer for 
King Features Syndicate. ance was made at the age of 16,/the age of 81. 

: when she was seen in a traveling) yr Hepbron, who was the first 
ing House.” In 1887 she had parts/haq been editor and rules interpr 
in “The Corsican Brothers” and 5 aoe 

Held Extensive Real Estate in cer of the Men's and Women's 
Rahway—Sister of Banker After touring the country forltne physi 
y two years, she made her debut on/.¢ the poothey Y. _ a 
RAHWAY, N. J., April 30—Miss|Lane; or, On Green Meadows.” In| cation grou in the East. H 
Clara Vanderhoven of 1085 Main|1891 she popes the leading woman|ieaves a = Ida M.: a pw 
estate and land holdings here and|As Drusilla Ives in a show called| grandchildren 
a sister of the late Ross Vander-|‘“The Dancing Girl,” she attracted a pase ee 
president of,the Rahway Savings|theatregoers. DANIEL H. COWLES 
Institution, died last night at the} Miss Harned created the role of| a 
ninety-sixth year. production of “Svengali” in Boston Bank, Civic Leader, Dies 
A descendant of early settlers of|in 1895, and later played the same foe stermenaer eal 
~-Daniel H. Cowles, former presi- 
dent of the Glens Falls National 


born here in the old Vanderhoven|duction at the Garden Theatre in 
homestead, a landmark for more|New York. For several seasons, 
than 100 years. Miss Vanderhoven|she performed at the head of her 
occupied the large residence untilijown company, and from 1906 to 
her last illness. Her ancestors, both|1907 she played in “The Love Let- 
on her paternal and maternal/ter.” 
sides, fought in the Revolutionary 
War 

There are no 
Vivors 


GAETANO LORIA 
Gaetano Loria, Italian teacher of 
singing and elocution who gave 
* ree $e : elocution lessons to King Geo 
DR. MFYER BRESLOW VI when he was Duke _* York, 
Dr. Meyer Breslow, a dentist whol died yesterday in Metropolitan 
resided and had his office at 1076|)Hospital after an illness of four 
Eastern Parkway, Brooklyn, died|months. He was born in @ village 
yesterday in New York Hospital|on the slopes of Mount Etna sev- 
after along tliness. His age was 6l.jenty-one years ago. 
Born in New York, Dr. Breslow; Mr. Loria went to England in 
was graduated from City College|1914 and gave elocution instruction 
and in 1906 from the College of|at Sandhurst Military College, thus 
Dental and Oral Surgery here. coming to the attention of the 
He leaves a widow, Mrs. Anna/royal family. Interned in England 
Finkelstein Breslow; two sons, Dr.|for a brief period early in the re- 
Leonard G. Breslow, a physician,|cent war, he came to New York in 
and Ensign Ira M. Breslow, USNR;/| 1941, landing with scant funds. A 
a daughter, Mrs. Lillian Sachs,!cable to King George bro 
and a sister, Mrs. Elizabeth Dob-|$1,000. Mr. Loria leaves a 
savage of Los Angeles. 


immediate sur- 
the Empire Automobile Company 


and the Rialto Theatre Corpora- 
tion. He was a director of the Im- 
perial ty and Color Corpora- 
tion, the Glens Falls Hotel Corpo- 
ration, the Chamber of Commerce 
and Glens Falls Hospital. 

He leaves a widow, a son, a 
daughter and two grandchildren. 


oring firm at 47 West Forty- 
seventh Street, New York, died 
oe here yesterday in her home at 14 
er,|\Lawn Avenue. Her 7 
es Philip Loria of 446 West Fifty-ishe was the 2 ag 
omamene — seventh Street. Dark. Her daughter, Mrs. Gladys 


Special to Tus New Yous Tossa. REV. JOHN A. MAHONY = |ontid. died mane a fee 
LARCHMONT, N. Y., April 30—| COLUMBIA, Pa., April 30 UP>— ; meaner ate 
Charles R. Stephens, a New York/The Rev. John A. Mahony, head of JACOB COHN 
lace salesman, who had worked|St. Peter’s Roman Catholic parish Special to Tas New Yoru Tons. 
for the American Lace Company/here since 1933, died in the church| . PATERSON, N. J., April 30—Ja- 
for many years and formerly op-|rectory today. His age was 70.|cob Cohn, a member of the Pate 
erated his own wholesale lace|Born in Mattewan, N. Y., Father|son Board of Health and a leader 
firm, died here yesterday in his|Mahony was educated at &t./in Jewish and civic circles, died 
home at 14 Gerlach Place. His|Mary's seminary in Baltimore, the) this morning in his home at 721 
age was 66. postion = N and S8t.|Bast Twenty-sixth Street after a 
LT urent’s Coll . 
Guahane >. anaes ege, Montreal brief illness. His age was 67. 


Special to Tar New Yorx Tuas HERMAN JERGENS Father of N. Y. Mirror’s Head 
BRONXVILLE, N. Y., April 30} CINCINNATI, April 30 (“%—| ERIE, Pa, April 30 @p— 
Charlies P. Melber, president of}/Herman Jergens, co-founder of|Charies B. McCabe Sr., one of 

Edward Bleeker & Co., brokers of|the Andrew Jergens Company, a|whose sons, Charles B. McCabe Jr., 
Green Coffee at 88 Front Street,|/cosmetics concern, and a director|is publisher of The New York Mir- 
New York, died here yesterday in| of the Bolles Sporting Goods Com-jror, and another, Fred McCabe, is 
his home at 450 Bronxville Road.|pany, died at his home here lastisouthwest business manager of 
iis age was 64. night. The United Press, died today. 


DR. EDGAR DAWSON 


DR. EDGAR DAWSON, 
HUNTER PROFESSOR 


Retired Head of History, Socia! 
Science Departments Dies— 
On Faculty for 30 Years 


Dr. Edgar Dawson, who retired 
in 1939 as head of the Department 
of History and Social Sciences at 
Hunter College, after thirty years 
on the faculty, died yesterday at 
his home, 55 East venty-sixth 
Street, at the age of 73. — 

From the time of his appoint- 
ment at Hunter in 1909, Dr. Daw- 
son was professor of history and 
political science, specializing in the 
teaching of government courses. 
He was largely instrumental in the 
division of the department into 
three parts in the fall of 1938 be- 
cause of the rapid growth of its 
courses in business and pre-sociai 
work. He was administrative head 
of two of the new departments, 
History and‘ Social Science, until 
his retirement. The third division 
is the Department of Business 
Economics. 

Born in Scottsville, Va., on Dec. 
22, 1872, Dr. Dawson was the son 
of George W. and Sarah S. Daw- 
son. He received # Bachelor of 
Arts degree from Davidson College 
in 1895 and a Master of Arts de- 


aducation at the Universities of 


Heidelberg and Leipzig in Ger-| 
three | 


many, receiving a Ph. D. 
years later. 

He began his teaching career at 
the New Providence Academy in 
Virginia after his graduation from 
Davidson College. On his return 
from Germany he becanf® Profes- 
sor of History at Delaware Univer- 
sity, and in 1906 assistant profes- 
sor of history and politics at 
Princeton University. He was ap- 
pointed Professor of History and 
Politics at Hunter in 1909. 

In 1897 Dr. Dawson married 
Anna King McKemy of Augusta, 
Va., who died in 1933. He leaves 
three sisters, Mrs. Daisy D. Wal- 


of 1940, 70 years old and broken lace, Mrs. Anne D. Frye and Mrs.| 


Clifton Yeomans, all of this city. 


“HENRY MALKAN 


Ex-Bookseller and Publisher 
Real Estate Broker Here 


Henry Malkan, bookseller and], 


blisher during the first World 

ar and a real estate broker there- 
after, with offices at 505 Fifth 
Avenue, died Monday of a heart 
attack at the age of 69. He resided 
at 55 Tieman Place. 

Born in Stockholm, Sweden, Mr. 
Malkan established a little news- 
stand at Hanover Square o 
the Cotton Exchange in 1892. 
received the patronage of many 
important persons, including the 
late J. Pierpont Morgan. To these 
men of the financial world he also 
sold many books and conceived the 
idea of opening ’ bookshop. Short- 
ly before 1900 He placed his sign 
over a basement location at 42 
Broadway, and his store soon be- 
came one of the largest in the Wall 
Street area. 

Mr. Malkan prospered as a book 
dealer and branched out as a pub- 
lisher, heading the World Publish- 
ing Company, which issued, among 
other best sellers, “The Private 
Lives of the Kaiser,” by Henry 
Fischer, and Emile Coué's “Meth- 
od,” a popular philosophy for living. 

Surviving are two sons, Arnold 
of this city and Lieut. Willard, who 
is with the Army in Germany. 


DR. ALBERT EVANS 


Presbyterian Pastor, 85, Former 
Moderator of Capital Synod 


Special to Tus New Youu Troces. 
WASHINGTON, April 30— Dr 


of 


known, had held pastorates 
Rochester and Lockport, N. Y.; 
Charleston, W. Va., and Baltimore. 
He was a former Moderator of the 
District of Columbia and West Vir- 
ginia Synod. 

Born in Rome, N. Y., he was 


He leaves a widow, Mrs. Matty 
Parry Evans. 


CLYDE C. BELL 
Special to Tus New Yorx Trowes. 
CRANFORD, N, J., April 30— 
Clyde C. Bell of 6 Adams Avenue, 
an architect here for many years, 
died yesterday in Muhlenberg Hos- 
ital, Plainfield, N. J., after a 
ef illness. His age was 65. Mr. 
Bell was a charter member of the 
Cranford Rotary Club. He also 
was a member of the New Jersey 
Society of Architects and the In- 
ternational Order of Foresters. 
J. WESLEY SLAUSON 
Special to Tus New Youx Times. 
NORWALK, Conn., April 30—J. 
Wesley Slauson, manager of the 
South Norwalk store of Rogers & 
Stevens, Inc., for the last ten years 
and of the firm's store here for 
twenty years previously, died on 
Sunday in his East Norwalk home 
after a long illness. His age was 
63. Born in this city, he was at 
one time with Saks Avenue 
in New York, 


’ 


B. MACKLIN, BX-AIDE 
QF CANADIAN PRESS 


Former Vice-President of News 
Service, Once Head of Free 
Press, Winnipeg, Dies 


WINNIPEG, April 30 UP—E. H. 


| Elson, Henry 


Macklin, former president and gen- | 


eral manager of The Winnipeg | Glaebs . Eve 
Free Press and one of the founders Golding Frances 


of The Canadian Press, died today. 
His age was 83. 


Mr. Macklin, according 


nm, Marie 
of cooperative news-gathering in |Jesefeun, Rev. Mathew 
BL 


Canada.” Energetic and a 


fighter, he was in the newspaper! Benjamin, Dorothy Mertz, Pauline Link and 
business for more than half a cen-| AQp* Sfhron. 


tury. 

Born in Hamilton, Ont., he 
the son of a business man. Mr. 
Macklin entered the newspaper 
business in 1879 with The Toronto 
Globe, and addressed envelopes in 
the room next to the one in which 
George Brown, famous editor, was 

a shot by a discharged printer 
1880. : 

In 1900 he went to Winnipeg 
as business manager of The Free 
Press there. He later became gen- 
eral manager of The Free Press, 
and in 1912 president of the paper. 
In 1935 he retired as gereral man- 
ager, but retained the presiden¢y. 

Mr. Macklin was instrumental in 

the founding of The Western As- 


fa 
in 


sociated Press of Canaca in 1907 nx 


and in the formation ten years 
later of Canadian Press, Ltd., now 
The Canadian Press, as a nation- 
wide coo 
served The Canadian Press first 
as vice president for the Weat, and 
in 1924 became honorary president. 


COHEN 
He continued as a director and) “Mil soseph grandson 


took an active part in the asso- 
ciation until 1937, when he re- 


ed. 
“or Macklin married Miss Mar- 
garet Jane Boyd, who died in 1917. 
A son, Terence Edward, and a 
daughter, Miss Kathleen Macklin, 
who became Mrs. L. V. Judson, 
were born to them. 


RAYMOND P. M’NULTY 


Counsel for the L. |. State Park 
Commission Dies at 58 


Special to Tus New Yorx Times 


GARDEN CITY, L. L., April 30) 1%6. Grace 
~Raymond P. McNulty, counsel | 


ree from the University of Vir-; 
nae in 1899. He continued his fOr the Long Island State Park 


ommission and the Jones Beach 


State Park Authority, died here to-| 


day at his home, 
Street. 
May 12. 
At Erasmus High School, Brook- 
lyn, where he was graduated in 
1905, Mr. McNulty was voted “the 
most outstanding student.” At St. 
Louis in 1904 he ran in the relays 
or Erasmus. At Yale, where he 
received an A. B. in 1909 and later 
his LL. B., he was captain of the 
soccer and track teams, again run- 
ning in the track relays. He was 
a member of the law firm of 
Corner, Bell, Russell & McNulty, 
32 Court Street, Brooklyn. 
Besides appearing for the Park 
Commission in much of the litiga- 
tion connected with the far- 
reaching highway developments of 
recent years on Long Island under 


Park Commissioner Robert Moses,| ff 
his classmate at Yale, he had wep tebe “ot 


resented the Commissioner in legal 
matters elsewhere in the metro- 
politan area. 

Mr. McNulty leaves a widow, 
the former Alice Roche; a son, Al- 
fred P., and four daughters, Mrs. 
William M. Brady, Margaret and 
Kathleen McNulty and Mrs. 
Geofge E. Martin, who was mar- 
ried last Saturday. 


FRED HIRSCHHORN 


Head of General Cigar Co., 75, 
Started in Field at 16 


Fred Hirschhorn, who retired in 
1940 as chairman of the board of 
the General Cigar Company, 119 
West Fortieth Street, died yester- 
day in the Doctors Hospital, 
Eighty-seventh Street and East 
End Avenue, at the age of 75. His 
home was in East Portchester, 
Conn. 

Born in this city, a son of Louis 
and Severine Lippmann Hirsch- 
horn, Mr. Hirschhorn entered the 
cigar industry at the age of 16 and 
remained in it fifty-four years. He 
was largely responsible for the for- 
mation of the United Cigar Manu- 
facturers Company, of which he 
became president ir, 1913. The 
name was changed to General 
Cigar Company in 1917, Mr. 
Hirschhorn continuing as president 
until he took over the board chair- 
manship more than ten years later. 

He leaves a widow, who was 
Hannah De Rothschild Scharps of 
Newburgh, N. Y., at their marriage 
in 1912; two daughters, Mrs. Ber- 
nard Behrend of Philadelphia and 
Mra. Jay Baumahn of New York, 


Other Obituaries on Following Page 


Births 
FRANK—Mr. and Mrs. Albert M. Frank ( 
Kohl) announce the bi 
Aa 


Anne and Stephen, at 
2. 1946 


2485 Devoe Ter- 
of Berenice (nee 
and the late 
ifford L., Jr., 


L., Sr, of 
pril 29, 1944, husband 
. son of © Hotalin 
Thomas O. Arden, father of 

Gen; brother 


race. A 
Smith) 


ASTRACHAN—Girsch D., M 
band of Marie and beloved father of John 
Mann, brother of Dr. Isaac Astrachan and 
the late Morris Astrachan Reposing at 
“The Riverside,” Téth §t. and 
Ave Notice of funeral later 

+ Om April 29, beloved wife 
of Ha D. Barr, mother of Rosalind Schan 
er «@ Audrey H. Stein; sister of Rose 
Feirstein and Samuel Terrell; darling grand- 
mother of Ronald, Robert, Judy, Na and 
Kenneth. Services Thursda M., 
Riverside Chapel, 

BARTLETT. . Reve 


et A. on A 
946, at Harkness 1 


- prih A, 
Pavillion, Medical Center 
. Wiliams Funeral 
Services at. Christ 

St. and Park Ave. 

. M. Interment Brigus, 


rth 30, 1946, husband 

her of Ernestine and 

Max, Herman, Mrs 

=. “wa? “we mbers 
es 'e pepter 

No 780. F. and A 

Part West Memorial Cha 

St.. Wednesday, Map 1 


late 
re 
from 
115 Weet 78th 
;P 
BENJAMIN—teadore. Shak re Lodge No 
10 F. and A. M.. sorrowfully announces the) 
death of Brother Isadore Benjamin, life mem 
ber, Masonic Services at Park West Chapel 


70th St. and Columbus Ave r today 
ARRY E. STORIN, Master 
MAX ZIGAS. Secy 


BERRYMAN 
father of 
anf Ry Bey, L, 1. Pri 
a m . ’ » 
a war's. 2P ke Vivlormsct Memorial 
Cemetery, Cold Spring Harbor, L. I. 


pet 
, at 


1 29, 1046. devoted 


on A 
Mills and Mrs 


prt 
Mrs item J 


@ 


| in Flora 
| Goodall, Harriet Fox 
| Het.nan, Julia 


WQS) League announce with sorrow the 


| 


| 


rative news service, He CHAMBERS—Miss Annabel, 


120 Fourth| tee later 
He would have been 59 on|DINSELBACHER—Michael J., 


nee 
7 HOPYMAN—Lindley M.. 
rth of @ son, Richard Red Bank. N J. be 


D. beloved hus-| JAMESON—Mrs. Arther 


of | MEISER—David, beloved busba 


Stedman. Services at the Devine &| our trustee, ad elser.| Serv 
A 


Deaths 


Arden, Clifford L., Sr. Karnof, Otte E. 
Astrachan, Girsch D. Keiser, David 
Kelleher, Patrick 
Kilmets 
(John The Greek) 
Marcia C. 


Marrus, Frances BR. 
Mogieleff, Sarah 
Noonan, John L. 
Ochi, Johanna F. 


eimer, Edgar D. 
eae 
ng, Samuel H. 


Pikins, 1 
Pollatse 


| hg Catherine \ 


saac K. 
Field, Ethel Brierty 


Glidner, Edwin R. 
binger, Eva 


Se ° . 

Senior, John L. 

Stephens, Charies BR. 
ucker, Frank 


. r. 
Ward, Artemas, Jr. 
Whinton, William A. 
Liegier, ignats 


i—Max, devoted father of Isidore 


ard beloved grandfather 
P.M., “The Riverside,” 
St.. Amsterdam Ave. 
BLUMENTHAL—Max. The Dentists’ 
ea 


our president's Deloved father Services at 
“The Riverside,’ 76th St.-Amsterdam Ave., 
Wednesday, 1 P. M 

SLOw—Merer D.D.S., beloved husband of 
Anna, father of Dr. Leonard, Lillian 


, Calif 

Pitkin Ave. 
Kastern Phkway. 11:30 A today 
BROWN—Helen Langdon, on April 29, beloved 
wife of Thomas E. Brown, daughter of the 
late Woodbury G. and Sophia Montgomery 
Langdon; grandJaughter of the late Rev 
Henry Eglinton Montgomery, and mother of 
Helen BR. L. Claiborne, Rosalie L ay 
Margaret M. Batker, Sophie D. and Joan L. 
Brown. Services at Church of the Incarna- 
tion, Madison Ave. and 35th St., Thursday. 
2 P.M Intefment Evergreen Cemetery 
Morristown, N. J 
BRUDER-—Mary, om April 30. at her residence 
3100 Brighton 24 St.. Brooklyn. widow of 


Serv- 
76th 


Samuel Bruder, beloved mother of Leo, Dr | 


Tannendaun 
Funeral! 
Brooa- 


Jacod Morris 
Dora Gordon, Shirley Schiffman 
from Guttermans, 2239 Church Ave, 


lyn, at 2 P.M. today 
YDOGSS—At Daytona Beach, Fla. on April 
Rev. Raiph L 


14. in hie Ninelieth year 
Brydges, M.A... »f Toronto, Canada, beloved 
husband of Florénee Jarvis and dear brother 
of Mrs. WR. Vincent, Mra. Seward Cole and 
Miss M. L. Brydges. Interment at Toronto 
of 30  Fartell 
on April 30. 1946 


“ruder Kate 


ve.. Mount Vernon, N.Y 
Services at the Jenks Funeral Home. 23 East 
34 St.. Mount Vernon, Thursday. 8 P. 
Interment Arlington Cemetery, Philadeiph 
Pa, Friday, at soon 
—t. Gerald, beloved son of Gussye and 
of the tate Cassel 
and Rose Cohen. Services today 1 1 PF. M., 
“The Riverside,” Téth St 
Washington, D. C. and Philadelphia papers 
lease copy 
COMEN—The Fraters of Pau 
mourn the loss of their beloved 
Gerald Cohen of Rho Chapter 
services May 1 at Riverside Chapel 
COUN—Suddenly, at his home, 724 East 36th 
St.. Paterson, N’ J.. on Ly ap April 3. 
1944, Jacob, beloved son of the late Marcus 
and Jennie Cohn and devoted brother of 
Raechel Cohn 
Rerthe Lefkowitz and George Cohn. Funeral 
on Thursday, May 2. from the Barnert 
Memorial Templ>, Broadway and Straight 
St... Paterson, N. J.. at 2 P. M Interment 
at Mount Neboh Kindly omit flowers 
DAWSON-—Dr. Edgar, PRD... on April W. at 
his residence, 55 East 76th St., beloved brother 
of Mrs. Daisy D. Wallace. Mrs. Anne D 
Frye and Mrs. Clifton Yeomans 
the Madison Avenue 
Chapel, 734d St. and Madison Ave., 
1A. M 
DEAN—At Montclair, N. J.. Tuesday. April 30, 
M.. Seloved wife of Fay S. Dean 
and sister of D HH. Eames of Shreveport, 
Service will be held at her home, 144 
Montclair. Thursday afternoon at 
Interment Watertown, N. Y¥ 
on April 


Presbyterian Chure 
Friday, 


La 
Union St 
2:30 o'clock 
DEVINE—William 
», 
of Patience Degnan 
Devine and Gladys Devine 


(haries, suddenly 


Richard and Edwar 
Notice of serv- 


Aortl 30. 1046, 
age 62 years, beloved husband of Wilhelmina 
dear father of Mathilda Keneske, Barbare 
Brown, Ruth Kennyon, John Dinselbacher 


and Louis Otto, brother of Mathilda Schmidt | NWOONAN—John L., on 


seven grandchildren also survive 


and John 
from George Werst 


Funeral Friday, 9 A. M 
Funeral Home, Ti4l Cooper Ave, Glendale 
thence to the Ascension R. C. Church. Mass 
M. Interment St. John Cemetery 

of Liexts. Benevolent Association. 
Association the 

Police, Ridgewood 


ay rR. O 
DURKIN—Catherine A., om April 20. 1946, wife 
of the late John devoted mother of Thomas 
and Lawrence J. Durkin. Funeral from 

her late residence. 260 East 176th St. Thurs- 

day, 9:30 A. M. Solemn Requiem Mass St 

Margaret Mary's Church, 10 o'clock. Inter- 

ment Calvary Cemetery, apet 


ELLIS—At Newark, N. J on Tuesday, 
30. 1946, Imxec K., devoted brother of Millie 


and Dr. Arthur J Ellis, of 23 Milford Ave 
in "Temple B { Jeshurun, corner of 
‘ne urun, 
Bt p- , Bu - Ave. on Friday, May 3, at 
2P M. Relatives and friends. also members 
of all organizations with which he was #ffil- 
ated, are invited to attend. Interment B'nat 
Jeshurun Cemetery. Hillside, N. J. Ve nt 


v 

= devoted husband of Ida roves 
tree ere. — — 

Milton: darting grandfather o une a 
Suzanne Blumberg. Services weeneseng, 2n 
M.. at Prospect Park Memoria! ape! 

2239 Chorch Ave., Brooklyn 

FIELD —In__ Holden, : Ape 30, Bthel 
Brierly, widow of George W. Field of_Scars- 
dale u ¥.. in her seventieth year. Funeral 
rvices at her home on Boyden Road, 
niden, ass., Friday at 2 o'clock. Inter- 


GILDN . B.. of 705 Prospect Ave 
Ridgefield, N. J., on April 30, age 69 years, 
beloved husband of Ann B. and father of 
Edwin D., and Edna Gildner Claiborne 
brother of Kathryn Irvin and Albert W 
Gildner. Services at Blackley Funeral Home 
Broad and Kim Aves. Ridgefield, N J. 
Thursday, 6 P. M. Interment Lanoka Ceme- 


t Frifa 
AL brk—nve, beloved wife of William 


. 


GLAUBIN 
devoted mother of Estelle. Sidney, Leon and|OPPENHEIMER—Dr. Edgar D 


dear daughter of Frieda Rosenfeld 
and the late Jacob. darling srandmother 
Services Thursday, 2 P at Gutter- 
man’s,” 2230 Church Ave. (Flatbush Ave.). 
Brooklyn. Interment Mount Lebanon Cem- 


ter 

oor £5—In Paterson, N. J.. Albertine. mottrer 
of Miss Louise Goeres, Matilda Pannes. Fu- 
neral services Friday, 10 A M.. John Ver- 
meuien Funeral Home, 334 Broadway, Pater- 
son, N. J. Friends may call Thursday after 
7 P.M. Interment Fairlawn Memorial Ceme- 


GOLDING—Prances, beloved mother of William 
A. Murray, Sadie and Mollie Welsman and 
dear grandmother Services at Schwartz 
Brothers," @© East Tr 
— Thureday, 1 

owers 

GOLDSTEIN—Fiors (nee Wetss). beloved 
mother of Jennie Pettinger, Sophie Lopatoff 

and Samuel. Services today at 

lors, 374 Empire Boule- 

P.M. Interment Wash- 


ington C . Brooklyn. 
GUEDSTEIN—Flora Members are requested 
to attend services Wednesday. 
12:30 P. M.. at ponerse a 
374 Empire Boulevard syeiire 
R BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION, 
— FRANK WEINBERG, President. 
AARON PRAGEZR, Secretary 
GOODALL—Harriet Fox, on April 30. 1946, be- 
loved wife of Thomas and sister of Mrs. T 
Heaney. Service et Frank E Campbell, “The 
Funeral Church,” Inc., Madison Ave. at Sist 
St.. Friday, 2 P. M 
HEIMAN—Julias on April 30, 1946. wife of the 
late Gus Heiman, beloved mother of Elsie H 
Solomon, sister of Mrs. Harry M. Osterweis 
and Sidney Levy, grandmother of Robert S 
Solomon and Pvt. William R. Solomon and 
great-grandmother. Services at “The Uni- 
" Lexington Ave 
May 2 at 10:30 
T.. on Aortl 30. 1946. hus- 
epbron of 146 North Grove 
. uN J Service at “The 
133 South Harrison &., 
J. @ Friday afternoon. 


. om April 30, 1946, In his 
husband of Hannah 
. father of Rose Susan 


Albert; 


. M t 


Abraham 
Boulevard Funeral Par 
vard, Brooklyn, 12:30 


Pa 


on 
BErenon— Sous 
band of Ida 
x. Grange 
Colonia aoe, 


HIRSHMAN—Esther, beloved wife of Philip 
Hirshman. Funeral services at 121 West 
105th St., 9:30 A. M. Thursday, May 2 

suddenly. om April 29 

at . loved husband of Anne 

Betts Hoffman and devoted father of Mrs 

Edwin F. Hubbard, Joseph Williams, 

Arthur G. and John C. Hoffman and brother 

of Arthur G. Hoffman. w y. 

3:30 P. M., at Trinity Episcopal Church, Red 

Bank. Interment private. Pittsburgh papers 


please copy. hy a 
Bosontts Set Philsdeiphia. = 
loved husband of Ida. devoted father of Belin 
Snyder, Helene Weiner, Edith Phillips and 
Funeral services Friday, May 3. 
. , at Sigmund Schwartz's Gramercy 
Park Memorial apel. Ave. and 10th & 
Interment Mount Cemetery 
E., beloved mother of 
Mrs. Henry Littlefield and Mrs. Arnold Hall, 
died after a long illness. Service and in- 
terment private 


materdam| ,.eROLEMAN—Marie, (nee Hampson), wife of 


devoted mother of 
Friday 


the late William T., 
Virgiata and Dorothy 
O04 West 1624 St.. Bronx Req 

10 A. M.. Sacred Heart Church, 

and Shakespeare Ave tnterment Holy 
Cemetery, North Arlington, N. J 

JOSEFSON—Rev, Mathew, on April 3. 1946 
of 4010 Mill Ave., Bronx. Funeral service at 

Swedish © tional Church, Grand &t.. 

New Rochelle, day, 2 P Int t. 

C . Reposing at the Burr 

. IS ath Ave. mt Vernon. 


Funeral from 


nd of 
voted father of Samuel J. Lewis, 
Kelser, Rose Binder -_ 
tne late Sara Silberman, «@ 
West Memorial 
@ and 


bus Ave. il 
Raltimore 


papers please 
Shiva will be obeerved at the home 
2 Rhynas Drive. Mount 


a 
bad 


nes- 
ot.” 


eee % 


copy 
of Harry Keiser, 
Vernon, N.Y 
KEISER— Davie 
Mount Vernon, NW. Y¥ 
the death of Davia 


Congregation 
learns with 
beloved 
M.. the “ 
ve 


i By Bs 


jarry 
hek, Sigmund KUN 


Wives | LILI 
th of 


' 





M | LILIENTHAL 
a, 


' 
i 


Ameterdam Ave | 


Sv Phi; April 29. 1946, 
other. & F. McGovern pr 
Funeral; iather of Louls V.. Jr 


{ 
‘ 


Rebecca Bauer and the late | 


| 
| 


MARC 
Services at| and Kate Halle 


husband of Patience Power, and fat ~ MOGIELEFF—Sareh, wife of Samuel 


KO 
April 30, 1944 


M'NULTY—Raymond F., 
Fourth 


Deaths | 


. mative of Meera Carrick | OPPENHEIMER—Bdgar D., 


and Shannon, County Letrim, Ireland, on 
Tuesday, April 30, 1946, husband of Kath- 
er 


© Lady cf the Most 


t Roman Catholic Church, | OPPENHEIMER~<Edgar D., M. D. The Medical 
regrets ¢ 
standing mem- 
friend. 


. M, Interment Mount St. Mary's 


John The Greek), April 26, 1946, 
sa.N Sod Punera), Wednes- 
= ch 43 West 60th St... 


May aide 


208 
nN. ¥. C. 


ao rvices at ‘The 
oklin Ave. at 12th St 
Tiday, 10 A. M 


and Marcia K 
Fairchild Chapel, Fra 
Garden City. N. Y.. 

Ernest, on April 30, 1946. of 
New York City, devoted 


KEL—George 
713 East lith St... 
bother of Emma 


a 
t Place. 


; mM 
Dr CARSON SPIER, Exalted Ruler. 
. CONKLIN, Secretary - 


A . 1946. 
ty-sixth Year, at the Jersey City Med- 
. after a long illness. He sur- 
his widow, Mrs. Edith Strode 


. and a daughter, Mrs. Thompson) 
and cremation at the 


his 
teal 
vived 
Lawrence. Services 
convenience of the family 

The Board of 


rustees and the Medical Board = The — 
note with sorrow the passing o 
a toward Lilienthal in hie cighty-sizth 


ny lientha! began his service with 
he hospital as an interne in 1687 and moved 
steadily upward to achieve the 


ition of At- 
Surgeon in 1899 and 


remem 
nis for his leadership in th 
medical 


and by 
thetr 


leagues 
many patients for bis devotion to| 


a. 
hex B. BERNHEIM, President 
The Mount Sinai Hospital 
GEORGE BAEHR. MD. 
Medical Board 
LILIENTHAL—-Howard, M.D The Associated) 
Alumni of The Mount Sina! Hospital notes) 
with deep sorrow of the peasing of their die 
tinguished colleague, Dr. Moward Lilienthal 
He was president of the association in 1900 
and has always maintained an active toterest) 
tn the a, We extend our heartfelt 
to his family. 
ay HARRY Wetss, MD. President 
ELMER 5S. GAIS, M.D., Secretary 
£ — Meward. Veterans of Base 
Hospital No. 3 of World War { record with 
sorrow the ot Dr. Howard Lil 
ten “me former director. Duri the 
years, he has 


A 
BELLA TRACHTENBIRG. 
VERN—iects ¥. M.D. FA. C.F. om 
beloved husband of Pauline 
Murphy) « devoted 
, John Waré and Mrs 
Joseph Otters and dear brother of Rosemary 
and Archibald R ing at his residence 
899 Sterling Place, Brooklyn. Soiemn Re- 
uiem Mass at St. Gregory's Church, Thurs- 
ay. 10 A. M. Intermenc Calvary Cemetery 
ce April 3, at 120 
St. Garden City. beloved husband| 
of Alice Roche McNulty #ad father of Mra.) 
Wiliam M. Brady, Mrs. George Martin, 
Miss Margaret and Mins Kathleen McNulty 
and Mr. Alfred P. McNulty. Funeral services| 
at St. Joseph's Church, Garden City, Thurs 
day. 11 A. M. Please omit flowers 
1$~Annie, beloved mother of Harry. Ben 
Services today, 1 P. M. at 
Prospect Park Memorial Chapel. 2299 Church 
Ave.. Brooklyn. Please omit flowers 


Marrus, darling mother of Judith, devoted] 
er of Rose Schwartz, Andrew Reesman,| 
Lillian Brower and Fiors Hollander 
“The Riverside.’ 76th St. and Amsterdam 
. May 2 at 2 P.M Newark) 

papers rlease copy. 
mother 


of Seymour, sister of Aaron Buchman, Noah! 


Buchman, Nathan Buchman, Irving Buchman,| his wife and his daughter 


Samuel Buchma Dr. Joseph Buchman, 


n 
Louise Maisel, Mollie Jaffee and Ida Cohen 
1 


Funeral from Midtown 
West 85th St.. N.Y 
Wednesday 


Memorial Chapel 
Cc. 2:30 PF. M. today 


Aprit 28. 19446. devoted 
son of the late Johanna and Daniel J. Noo-) 
nan, beloved brother of Mary Christine Jonn-| 
son Funeral from Walter B. Cooke, Ine 

Home, 117 West 72d St.. Thursday,’ 
Requiem Mass, Blessed Sacrament 
Interment Calvary Cem- 


Funeral 
OA M 
Church, 10 o'clock. 
a 


ery. 
| OEHL~On A 2. 1986. Johanna F inee! 


Funeral services will be held | OPPENHEIMER—a 
High; on April 29, at 


ont Ave. (near Con- 
Pl cm OPTENHEIMER—Dr. 


1, at) OPPENHEL 


julem 
168th St | 
Cross 


Brooklyn, be 
and 
tate 
in her eighty 


Lohr), af r irving Ave 
loved wife of the late Philipp M.. Sr 
mother of fea H.. Jr. and the 
Johanna Ochi amilton, 

seventh year. Reposing at the 

er al page. 1230 

uneral y 9 M. & 
Mass at St. Martin of Tours Roman Catholic 
Church at 9:30. Interment St. John’s Ceme- 
tery. Masses preferred 


nlemn Requiem | 


M.D.. suddenly, | 


beloved husband 
of Carolyn Well, father of Lieut. ; 
David B.. Ensign Edgar D. Jr. and ET 
Z/e Frank W. and son of David EB. and 
the late Matilda Davidson and brother of 
Gertrude mer. Services Mey 1, at 
MA 
wel-El, 66th St. and Sth Ave 
estly requested that no flowers be sent 
OPPENHEIMER—Zdgar PD. Jewish Child Care 
Association of New York notes with profound 
regret and & sense deep joes the emtimely 
death of Dr. Edgar D. Oppenheimer, Chair- 
man of the fection tn (General Medicine 
Pediatrics and Surgery of its Medical Board 
of Consultants. For many years he gave 
freely and generously of his time and out- 
standing talents in the treatment and care 
of the wards of the casociation who were 
In his experience, learning and skill 
To a family we extend our 
deeply-felt_ aympathy « condolences 
CHESTER ROHRLICH, President 
For Medical Affairs Committee 
EDGAR L. ROSSIN, Chairman 
HAROLD RODNER, 
R. DUDLEY D. SHOENTFELD. 


sar 0D. 
his home; 


Vice-Chairmen 
. The Board 
Trustees and the Medical Board of 
Israel Hospital have learned with profound 
sorrow of the sudden asfIng of Dr. Edgar 
mheimer. Consulting hopedic Sur- 

geon on the staff Oppen- 
patients 


Ortho- 
attaining position of 
opedic Surgeon in 1845. In 

his years of association With the hospital 


he enjoyed the highest esteem of the staff| OLSHIN—Howard nee 
oumpane died im the service of his country, 
In eermany, sw your 
Your friendly spirt 


for his integrity and tious devotion 
to the welfare of the patient. We extend our 
deepest sym ny to his family 

David L. Pode, Pres_ Board of Trustees 

Henry C. Falk, M. D., Pres. Medical Board 
n4 D. 
Board of Beth Israel 
the sudden pesena, 

mer. Cons ‘ting 


Medical 
of Dr 
hopedic 


tend our heartfelt « PL to his family 
MICHAEL WEINGARTEN. M.D. President 
ABRAHAM H. SPIVAK, M. D., Secretary 

MER—Edger D.. M D..The Asso- 
ciated Alumni of The Mount Sifal Hospital 
has learned with sorrow of the un- 
timely death of its league. Dr or D 
Oppenheimer, and extends ity heart? sym - 


pathy to his oni. 
HARRY WEISS. M. ©. President. 
ELMER 8. GAIS. M. D., Séuretary 


- 
-—o 


Cernelia, suddenly, on 
beloved daughter of Charles| PAIGE—J) 
onselm 


"| PICKERIN 


WILLIA 
POWERS—On April 2%, Denis 


col 
profession and his genial personality | ROGER 


ScUuL 


Services| 


| Minnle (nee Frank) 


William C | TULCIN—Henry . The 
mortal Hospital, officers and members record 


Bushwick Ave} 
deepest sorrow the untimely —— | 


it ts earn | 


pect |MOLLANDER—Herman and je. Im sacred 
memory of my lowed paren. 
VY 


The Junior SOLOMON—Adraham 
Hospital is| memory 


Beaths 


MM D 


Base Hospital g3 of World War I t 


Veterans 


learned with deep sorrow of the untime) 


death of thelr associate Dr Edgar 
Oppenheimer. His f* 

operative spirit will be remembered by ail « 
ws ALVIN HIRSH, Chairman 


SELLA TRACHTENBERG. Secretary 


Board of the Hillside Hospital 
announce the death of a ion 
ber, valuable worker and cherished 


D 
mial persenaiity and co- 


ft 


We extend our sincere condolences © the 


bereaved fart! 
LT BROADWIN M. D.. President 
MARTIN SCHREIBER. M. D ary 
B. A 1. at 

ton, T 


. age TT, on 
ex at Hilipet 
Metuchen, N. J.. May 2, at 


al services 
ai > Earle Ave. 


on april 2, 

Funeral Home. 

Li, 0 P.M 
nd. 


atte 
RICHARD CONDON. President 


10 A. . Midtown Memorial Cha 
17, West 83th St.. New York 


Bateile Asiel Pollatechek, on Twesda 
1 Services Thursday, 10.30 A 
“The Riverside,” 7 


May 1, at 8 M. Interment private 


PotT—The British War Veter 


sorrowfully announce the death 
Melinda Post, wife of our past pr 
Woodruff Law Post. 

ME. KOPP. President 


hand of Margaret (nee Davis), devoted 
ther of Mrs. Marie Gorman, W 
James Powers, John 
et Kelleher, Mary Minn and John Power 
uneral from Columbus Circle Chapel 


inter ment 


Anan, suddeniy, on April 
16, beloved daughter of Clarence B 

the late Elisabeth I rs and sister 
Clarence B. Rogers Jr al 


S.. Red Bank, N 
PM 

th 1., suddenly on April 
1946; below 
mother of arence B. Rogers Jr 
services at The Mount M 
West Front St.. 
Gay at 2 30 P. 
BOOBY —Cicorge 


Funer 


M 
The Women's Divisios 


HIAS sorrowfully records the sudden and un 
hesband « 


timely peasing of George Root 
Sephie Rooeby, active director of the 
i2ation 
to untokt numbers of people who 
sincere and kindly service from the ls 
George Rooby in his endeavors to ameliors 
of our unfortunate Jews sbroe 


orga 


the misery 
To the 
sympgthics 


Bet- 
‘unere! Horne, 
2°? MM 


HM. The Veterans Asso- 
ciation of the First Battalion NMNY_ reeret 
to announce the death of its veteran member 

1646. Funer Rona ids 
Lynbroos, 
are requested to 


POLLATSCHEK—Sigmund, beloved husband of 
pers 
a 


of Eth 
esident, Dr 
J., beloved hus- 


fa- 


Davis, brother of Mar- 


. « 
. May 2 OMA MM. 
t. Raphael's Church, 

MM Calvary 


m 
and 
ot 
service at 
the Mount Memorial Home, 155 West Front 
J., om Thursday, at 230 


= 
wite of Clarence B. Rogers and 


jemorial Home, 135 
Red Bank, N. J.. on Thure- 


This tragedy will bring great crief 
received 
te 
te 


4 


bereaved family we extend deepest 


ELIZABETH LESSER. President. 


Mrs. ABRAHAM HERMAN 
Chairman Exec Board 

SON AEFER—Leuis, of 7144 Brome Park 
guddeniy on April 3. beloved husband 
Fey. dear father of § 
Funeral Ma i 

Chapel, 3298 
IN—Melen M 
Deeters Mospitel on April 
wife of Vincent. 
Shigids, mother of Vincent Scullin Jr 
John and Joseph Shields. sister of Mar 
Irene, James and Jcseph Walkh. Also 6% 


; 
~ 


vived by 4 grandchildren. Pepesing at — 
at Sist St. Requiem Mass wil 
Ignatius Loyola Church, 
Park Ave. and 64th St.. Wednesday. 11 A. M 


B. Campbell, “The Funeral Cherch,” 
Madison Ave, 
be offered at St 
Interment Calvary Cemetery. Rich 
papers please copy 
SENIOR—John Lawson, of Lenos, Mass 
merly of Chicago. Ul 
1946. at St. Luke's ai, New York Cir 
beloved husband of aud Cowheam Sen 
and devoted father of Mary Senior Fear 
and John L. Senior Jr. Funeral service at 
Collegiate Church of St. Nicholas, Sth Are 
44th St.. New York City, at 11 A. M 
16 


Thursday, May 2. 


1946, belowed husband of Katherine 
ona D. Crawford. Funeral 
lert & 1843 Palmer Ave., 
mont Y Wednesday. May 1, 
PM. Interment Fernciiff 
TUCKER—\rank, on April 
eighty-fif:h year. at 

Ave.. Larchmont. N. Y¥ 


Nesiage Lare 
a8 


He ts survived 
Mrs 
Funeral private 

—Henry F., dearly 
adored father 
Joan T. Bonoff. Enai 


er 
TULCIN 


Paul 


Tulein USNR; devoted er-in-lew 


Richard & Bonoff and grandfather of Peter 


Bast 


a 


widow of the late Jona 
and 


y. 


re 


(for- 


on Monday, April 2 


—_ 
7 
the 
at 


Interment privat 
| MARRUS—Frances B., wife of the late David STEPUENS—Charies B.. suddeniy om A 7s. 

Se0- 
hegan, devoted father of Dorothy and Mra. 
services at Genh- 


is 


16. im his 
is home, 32 Carina 
by 
Steriing 
Please omit flower 
beloved husband of 
of David 
" Robert Frank 
ath 


Services at the Riverside Memorial Chapet 


in Far Rockawa; 
TULCIN—Henry 
af Lomg Beach Federal Savings and 


« Directors and employ 


death of Henry FP. Tulcin, who had 
closely connected with 
many years as a director and real 
praiser 
to the members of his rez 
DAVID JACOY President 
CARNANAN, Secretary 
P Long 


estate « 
fami 


VANCE 


wih 
of their worthy vice president and exte 


thetr ee 
Rn G 
MOE KERMAN 
TULCIN—Heary PF. 
Beach records with deep sorrow 
of its esteemed member and ioyal Denefact 


GE §. REISS, Pr 


Secret 
Temple “Inraei of 


Thursday, at 10:3 A M 
- 
Lean 
Association are deeply grieved by the sudden 

been 


the association for 


~ 
4 


Neartfelt sympathies are extended 
Beach Me- 
to the members of his fam! 

esident 


the demise 
or 


and extends heartfelt sympathy to the be- 


reeved family 


CHARLES SILVER. President 


a 


M h-Ei Chapel of Temple Eman- | IRVING J. SHARLOT, Secretary 


TULCIN—BHenry F. The employes of L. Tulctn 


& Son, Ine 
uainted with him since his 
their 


boyhood. . mou 


WARD—Artemas, Jr., on April % 1946 
service at St 

Ave -Sist St Wednestay, 
WHINTON--William A.. on A 

at Plaza Funeral Home 

N.Y CC. Funeral service Thursday, May 
se PM 
ZIFOLER—ienats, at Miami 
voted father of Anna es ~ Re 
Wednesday 3 F M. at Park ot 
418 West Toth St. Services Friday, 


Beach Fila 
wing aft 


In Memortam 


and loving 
ALMA 
MILLER—Jaco®. <A tribute of love om yr 
dirthda MILLER FAMILY 
MURRAY—HMugh Edward. 
of my dear 
Hugh Edward Murray. who died 
Sadiy missed 
ways in our hearts 
SADIE G.. ANITA, BUSTER 
g.. 138th H M. Ordnas 


May 2 


Apri 3 1945 
twenty-seventh birthday 
will not be forgotten 

RUTH and RALPH WAYSSE 


Today 


Ww 
CHILDREN 


Memorial Services 
MUBRBRAY—ttugh Edward, died May 2 
beloved usband of Sadie G. and 


Anita and James A 
will be 


father 


Ave. & Sth St. at oP 
cent Ferrer Church, Lexington Ave. & 
St M. and the Church 


many of whom have becn ac- 
m 
beloved employer, Henry 


h- 


Interment Cypress Mille Cemetery. 
de- 
er 

ape, 
May 1, 


vr 


In loving memory 
usband and our devoted father, 
1945. 
Forever tn our thoughts, al- 


In tender and loving 
IVS. CHILDREN and GRAND- 


1045 
devoted 
( Bester) 
offered 

Thursday, Me 

. 1946, at St. Ignatius Loyola Church. Pa: 
12:3 M. &. Vin- 

Aer 


o 


ment. 150 West Tist St.. at 


The assurance of experienced, 


Ae 


of mind 


night. One 


FRAN 


“THE PUNERAL CHURCH,” INC. 


PRANE © CAMPOELL, LICENSES Bansoee 


dizector maintains close 
contact with each family 
we serve, a helpful rela- 
tionship which distin- 
igh iechild servi 


FUNERAL DIRECTORS SINCE 1886 
Preset B Petredtd | bowneed Mannger 





When weet te preserve 
marriage of death 

or legal items appearing in The New 

York Times get the RAG PAPER 


Little Falls] edition. 


Oy mal every dey—S198 » your 
The New Pork Times 


high standard for all patrons— 


In your home, your church, or our chapel. 


K E. CAMPBELL 
Talgahowe Bedtoryield § 3500 


MADISON AVENUE AT SIST STREET 
OFeCc, ims 


rumnats “4” 150 
OUR FUNERAL HOMES 
MSE ae 


Ase Iremont 
heueee oats 


to LAckewenna 41000 wat mitnight; 
Newark, MArvet 3-3000. 9.30 A. M. & 6:8 
?. M. weekdays, Saterdayes wet 3 FF. My 
Westchester, White Plots 8500, 0:50 A. MM. 
fe 5:30 PF. M. weekdays, Saturdays ante & 
?. M.j Mineola, Garden Olly 06, 0:58 
4. MB. to 6:30 P.M. Theredage ond Fridega, 


Seterdaye wnt 3 FP. OM. 
” a 


personal service . . . any hour of the doy or 


| 
| 





Today’s News Index JOHN SENIOR Diu; 
- INDUSTRIALIST, 67 


— | 
Books .....22- 31-32 
Business , Obituaries ....25 CementManufacturer,Founder | 


Buyers Ratio ... ne of Cornell's Alumni News, John 
| 


Editorial! . Real Wstate... 
Events Today.22 Society Paul Jones Authority 


Fashions ......30 Sports 
Financial ..37-43 Theatres ... 
Food .........30' Weather John Lawson Senior, lawyer,) 
Dispatches Other Than Those Listed head of a group of cement manu- 
in Summary on Page One facturing companies, 4 leading) 
FOREIGN Cornell University alumnus and) 
Schacht tells tribunal that he was/0lector of John Paul Jones me- 
. ~ oS m rabilia, died on Monday in 8t. 

a patriotic pacifist. Page 2} ; 
British for 4 ? , .| Luke's Hospital after a long illness. 
elay on Byrnes’ offer;|,, 

Cabinet to Be consulted, Page 4 Mr. Senior, who lived at Lenox, 
First families of American troops Mass., formerly resided for many 
reach Berlin . Page 4/year- in Chicago, where he main- 
Emir will become King ‘of Trans-|t#ined an office. His age \.as 67. 
Jordan on May 25 Page4| At his death he was chairman of) 
Anti-Moscow block is at work, Tass | the board of directors of the Con- 
agency reports Page 5| solidated Cement Corporation, of 
Big Four receive Czech demand for| which he was formerly president, 
town in German Silesia Page 6/and president and a director of the) 
Tangier, little changed by Franco| Cowhar Engineering Company,) 
occupation, is booming Page 6) both with headquarters in Chicago. 
General Clark protests ‘‘buzzing'’| He was also president and a direc-| 
of B-17T by two Russians, Page®/tor of the Signal Mountain Port- 
Central Philippines is swept by &!jand Cement Company at Chat- 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946 





wave of disorders. Page $ tanooga, Tenn.; the Fiorida Port- 


Red core of Army in Changchun: is 
strictly disciplined. Page 10 
Source close to Marshall expects an| 
early truce in Manchuria. Page ll 
Japan's food policy held by Acheson! 
to be cOncern of U. 8 Page 12) 
DOMESTIC 
Heroism of crew warmly acclaimed | 
by skipper of the Solar Page 2) 
Disaster speedily alerts wartime re-! 
lief group of Red Cross Page 
Military expert sees world spotlight! 
shift to@Paris Page 12) 
Women voters propose full U. 8S. aid! 
to strengthening U. N Page 22 
Gen. Bradley concedes some hous- 
ing inequity for veterans. Page 52 
NEW YORK 


Petrillo to forbid mtisicians to ail 


; 


land Cement Company, Tampa, 
Fla., and the Trinity Portland Ce- 
ment Company at Dallas, Fort 
Worth and Houston, Tex. He be- 
came president of Consolidated at 
it. formation in 1926. 

Mr. Senior, who was born in| 
Montgomery, N. ¥., was a son of| 
the late George Edward and Han-| 
nah Wellar Sears Senior. He at-) 
tended University Preparatory) 
Schoo. at Ithaca, N. Y., and Cor-| 
nell University, from which he ob- 
taine:| his law degree in 1901. While! 
an undergraduate at Cornell, Mr.| 
Senior founded the Cornell Alumni 
News, which he then edited. 

In 1901-06 he served as the uni- 
versity’é first graduate manager of | 


in television indefinitely. Page t| athletics He was a Cornell t tee 


Policeman gets 8 Navy awards for 
heroism as flier in Pacific. Page 22) 


in 1918-28, and a member of the 
university's committee on general 


State Medical Society calls = administration, 1923-28. 


county health units. Page 


Dr. Edgar D. Oppenheimer, ortho- 
pedic surgeon, dies at 62. Page 25) 


His interest in John Paul Jones, 
the Revolutionary naval hero, be- 


John L. Senior, cement manufac-|§8" more than forty years ago. In 


turer, dies at 67 
City's home relief rolls increasing, | 
but peak is far off 


Page 26/1940 Mr. Senior presented to the! 


Navy the original commission as a’ 


Page 27| captain issued to Jones by the Con- 


First May Day parade since the/tinental Congress. The commission 


war to be held today. 


Tenants in housing project deprived) 
of homes by dispute. Page 28) 


Community Aid Society sees need| York, 1906-12, and of Hurley, Ma- 
Page 29\son & Senior in Tulsa, Okla., 


for charity at peak. 
Five new air services will begin) 
here today Page 30 
Police and school departments war 
on juvenile delinquency. Page 30 
“Theatre de la Mode’’ to open today 
in Reid house. Page 





“Bad modern” furniture is assailed! po enhard of Walden, N. Y., and a 


at meeting of designers. Page 30) 
CPA names group to pass on all) 


non-housing eonstruction. Page 52|S9™ery 


State official revealed as incorpora-| 
tor of Klan forerunner. Page 52) 


METROPOLITAN AREA 


Page 27| was dated Oct. 10, 1776. 


Mr. Senior was a member of the! 
law firms of Blair & Senior in New 


1912-14. 

He leaves a widow, Mrs. Maud 
Lou'se Cowham Senior, a son, John 
L. Senior Jr. of Lenox; a daughter, 
Mrs. Mary 8. Fearey of Washing- 
ton, D. C.; a sister, Mrs. James 


brother, George E. Senior of Mont-| 





HENRY P. TULCIN 


| 


Dr. Howard Lilienthal, N. Y. sur-| /¢xtile Dealer, 56, Was Active in 


geon, dies in Jersey City. Page 25 
ALBANY 

State board lists 158 who passed the 
bar examination. Page 36) 


WASHINGTON 
Senators say hearing shows danger 


Charity Work at Long Beach | 
—_______. | 


Henry P. Tulcin, president of!) 
L. Tulcin & Son, Inc., textile deal- 
ers, and an active worker in civic! 


and philanthropic affairs, died! 


Monday night at his home in Long 


to our war secrets. Pagel Beach, L. I. His age was 56 


Vandenberg's suggestion for 4-power 


Among the organizations in the 


pact stresses 2-party value. Page 3)... of which Mr. Tulcin tiel-| 


House division on OPA remains 
firm after recess. Page 30 
GENERAL 
B. W. Fleisher, former publisher of| 
Japan Advertiser, dies. Page 25) 
E. H. Macklin, former Canadian} 
newspaper executive, dies. Page 25 
University of California builds new 
type atom smasher. Page 27 
Railroads, at Chicago parley, re- 
study strike issues. P 
U. 8. Chamber board is divided on| 
labor act stand. Page 29 
Wallace sees an increase in part- 
time farming. Page 29 
SOCIETY | 
Miss Helene Lederman is wed to) 
Clarence Buttenwieser. Page 31) 
Miss Eileen Stafford bride of Walter} 
E. Travers Jr. Page 31 
FINANCIAL AND BUSINESS 


Sharp drop follows restoration of| 
free market in U. 8. bonds. Page 37 


pated were the Federation of Jew- 
ish Charities, United Jewish Ap- 
peal, American Red Cross and the 
New York sund. He was also a 
trustee of Temple Israel in Long 
Beach and a vice president of the| 
Long Beach Hospital. 


ie leaves a widow, Mra. Minnie! | 


Frank Tulcin; two sons, David 
Paul Tulcin and Ensign Robert 
Frank Tulcin, USNR, and a daugh- 
ter, Mrs. Richard 8. Bonoff. 


DANE H. CLAUDIS 


Banjoist, Played in Vaudeville 
for More Than 50 Years 


Special to Tas New Yorx Trcxs. 

LOS ANGELES, April 30—Dane| 
H. Claudis, banjoist who was cred-| 
ited with introducing community 





Stocks rise in quiet market, ignor-|*imging in vaudeville houses, died 
ing action of U. 8. bonds. Page 37| Of @ heart attack Saturday in Gen- 
American Woolen Co.'s board aban-|¢ral Hospital. He was 71 years old. 
dons revamping plan. Page 37; Mr. Claudis played the “big! 
Price curb is ended by OPA on|time” for more than fifty years. 
building steel Page 37| During the last few years he had) 
Bedding industry now faced by vir-|been playing character roles in| 
tual shut-down. Page 37| motion pictures. He was born in 
Calls on WAA to speed up surplus|Canandagua, N. Y. 
disposal. Page 37 a 


Issues of two utilities are awarded 
in competitive bidding. Page 37 

U. S. Steel fears early shutdown un- 
leas coal strike ends. Page 37) 

Army officers continue to return to! 
Wall Street. Page 


WALTER R. ARNOLD 
SOUTH BEND, Ind., April 30 
(?)—Walter R. Arnold, lawyer and 
former State Senator from Mar- 
shall and St. Joseph counties, died 
last night in a hospital here at 


NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 


. 
. ly os 


_ a by ta, ts! eee 
nh ee Oh eo a ae ae 

a By PIER ed bet ng A og 

. « Ase ee eg a 


2 eh ge * 


MMER Is... 


onsolidated Edison shows rise in 
ene for year. Page las tg - 
Latest developments on bond and|,, Mr ar tha oy re- 
share markets in London. Page 39), © in northern indiana as a 
Standard Oil of California shows a| lawyer's lawyer.” He opened his 
slight rise in profit. Page 40 first office in Chicago and later 
Hampton Roads sells bonds at in-|went to Kalamazoo, Mich., where 
terest cost of 2.2%. Page 40\he held his first public office as 


United Aircraft promotes 3 officials | municipal clerk. 
to vice presidents. Page 41 5 ra! 
Federal Reserve names liaison man| Other Obituaries on Preceding Page 
with monetary group. Page 42 
Cities Service subsidiary to call $28,- 
211,400 of debentures. Page 42 
May rye up 5 cents a bushel; other 
grains are steady. Page 43 
Cotton prices off 10 to 20 points 
after day of uncertainty. Page 43 
Page Page 
Advertising ... Foreign Exch.. 
Bond Sales Grains . , 
Bus. Records. Money 
Commodities.. Out-of-Town .. 
Cotton ..43 | Over Counter.. 
Curb .. | Stock Sales.... 
Dividends ....41!Topics ........ 
SPORTS 
Feller’s no-hit game ainst Yanks) 
wins for Indians, 1—0. Page 34| 
Dodgers lose to Cubs, 2—1, on run 
forced home in eleventh. Page 34 
Louls arrives to start training at 
Pompton today for Conn. Page 34 
Rippey beats Spy Song by neck with| 
late rush in Derby Trial. Page 35) 
Buzfuz, 9—10, wins Jamaica sprint;| 
Jessop scores a triple. Page 35) 


National Football League agrees to) 
player contract change. Page 36 


Qualifying trials in U. 8. opefi golf) 
are set for 26 courses. Page 36 


ADVERTISEMENTS 

Page Page| 
Apartments ...47| Moving .......47 
Auction Sales..14| Public Notices, 2) 
Automobiles 35 Real Estate. ..46) 
Boats deve 35 Resorts .......36 
Business Opps.50 Rooms—Board.47 
Buyers’ Wants.44/ Situations ....49 
For Sale.. 50 | Stores-Offices..47 
Help Wanted. .47| Wanted to Pur.50) 
Lost & Found.45' Wholesale Mkt.44 








AND WIS ORCHESTRA 


Bette BUCKNER & Tiny MORRIS 
ABBEY ALBERT At THE PIANO 


ALPIN 
ye Grill 


Nightly, except Sundey, 
ot dinner ond wspper. 
No cover charge of any time. 


Spacious dance floor 
Reservations: Pion. 46-5700 


Alpin 


BROADWAY AT 34TH 


ae ads ) ‘a eb. tm . % # sa , : | . . 
; to . 


and the sum is a beautiful home 


secant’ Gen iit adhetmendih tet Store Hours—9 :30 A. M. to 5:30 P. M.; Open Wednesday to 9 P. M.; Telephone STuyvesant 9-4700; Broadway to 4th Ave.—8th to 10th St., New York 3, N. Y, 


for dates and digests of news items 
Published monthly and annually. : " 


a” 


~ 





LEFT-WING PARAD 
T0 SALUTE MAY DAY 


First March Since the War Has 
Been Repudiated by the AFL 
Trades and Labor Council 


ALL POLICEMEN ON DUTY 


Procession Down Eighth Ave. 
to Begin at 1:45 P. M. and 
End in Union Square Rally 


Repudiated by the Central 
Tradés and Labor Council of the 
American Federation of Labor, the 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 


first May Day parade since the) | 


wer will be held this afternoon 
under the sponsorship of Commu- 
nist-controlled labor unions and 
other left-wing organizations. 

The march down Eighth Avenue 
is scheduled to begin at 1:45 P. M. 
at Fifty-sixth Street. A second 
division of paraders will be picked 
up at 3:30 P. M. en route after be- 
ing mobilized between Eighth and 
Ninth Avenues in Thirty-ninth, 
Thirty-eighth, Thirty-seventh and 
Thirty-sixth Streets. The procés- 
sion will go down EHighth Avenue 
to Seventeenth Street, thence east 
to Union Square where performers 
from several Broadway shows will 
take part in a program of songs, 
skits and other entertainment. 

All days-off for members of the 
police department were cancelled 
for today. There will be 2,155 
uniformed policemen and detec- 
tives on active assignment for the 
parade, the remainder of the force 
being held on reserve. Orders an- 
nounced at Police Headquarters 
yesterday also called for a guard 
to be maintained at all public! 
buildings, including churches and 
Government offices. 


Veterans to Wear Uniforms 


Despite deciarations by Army) 
and Navy officiails and the United 
States Attorney's office that the 
weering of service uniforms by 
veterans in the parade, permitted 
only on recognized military o¢ca- 
sions, would be contrary to Fed- 
eral law, the “United May Day 
Committee” has been exhorting 
ex-service men to turn out. The 
Daily Worker, Communist news- 
paper, said that “every contingent 


Acting Consul Gen. G. R. G. Van Swinderen (left) presenting 350,000 full blooms to Vincent R. Impellitteri 


Vincent R. Impellitteri, Acting 
Mayor of New York, accepted yes- 
terday a gift of 350,000 tulips from 
the people of Holland to the people 
of this city at the Central Park 
comservatory gardens, Fifth Ave- 
nue and 105th Street. G. R. G. 
Van Swinderen, Acting Consul 
General of the .Netherlands, who 
made the preseptation, character- 
ized the donation of Holland's na- 


CORTESI WINS AWARD 


OF SIGMA DELTA CHI 


Special to Tux New Yorx Tracks. 


of trade unionists in the May Day CHICAGO April 30--Sigma 
ade will be headed b i- F 
Soo vets.” . ra Delta Chi, national journalistic 
In an appeal to veterans, Irving |fraternity, announced today its 
Goff, New York Communist Vet-|awards for outstanding journalism 
erans Director, said: “Come out in| achievements in 1945. Those re- 
full uniform, OD or khaki, which- ceiving the awards and the com- 


ever you have, complete with cap, 
tie, discharge emblem and every|™ents of the judges were as fol- 
lows: 


bit of ‘fruit salad.’ We'll march in 
military formation.” 

There appeared small prospect, 
however, that marching veterans 
in uniform would be prosecuted. 
The Army and Navy held that en- 
forcement was a matter for civil- 
ian authorities, while the United 


in Mexico City, 
spondence award, 
sistently. informative 
despite the pressure of an un- 


Arnaldo Cortesi, former Buenos 


Aires correspondent of THE NEW 


YorK TIMES, who is now stationed 
foreign corre- 
“for his con- 
dispatches 


States Attorney's office safd it/friendly Argentinian Government.” 


was not an arresting agency but 
a prosecuting office and that it 
would not act unless arrests were 
made. 


Ban Display of AFL Signs 


The ban placed on parade par- 
ticipation by the Central Trades 
and Labor Council extended to the 
display of AFL banners and in- 
signia. Officers of six dissident 
AFL unions are listed as parade) 
sponsors and their members are! 
expected to be in the line of march. 
Also expected in the parade, ac- 
cording to Joseph Stack, National 
Maritime Union, CIO, Port Agent 
in New York, are “an estimated! 
3,000 merghant seamen in dunga-| 
rees, hundreds of whom were tor-| 
pedoed during the war.” 

Opposition to participation in the| 
parade was voiced, it was learned, 
within the ranks of District Coun- 


‘ 


Sun, 
award for war correspondence, for 
showing 
following the war through to a 
conclusion despite injuries and dis- 


jeditorial 


editorial 
and lettering, which man or child 


John Dowling of The Chicago 
the Ernie Pyle memorial 


“unusual persistence in 


tinguished himself as a_ vivid 


writer of extraordinary ability.” 


Reuben (Rube) L. Goldberg of 
The New York Sun, whose winning 
cartoon, “Must Be 
Leak,” “was a simple and direct 
unbestrewn with labels 


could understand at once and with 
some appreciation of the humor of 
the situation.” 

Peter Edson of the NEA Wash- 
ington bureau, the Washington 
correspondence award, for “excel- 
lent reporting on the difficult 


jatomic bomb assignment.” 


James McGuire and Jack Mc- 


cil 9 of the Brotherhood of Paint-|P%#ul of The Chicago Daily Times, 


ers, Decorators and Paperhangers 
of America, whose secretary-treas-| 
urer, Louis Weinstock, is chairman 
of the parade committee. 

The council at a meeting several 
weeks ago, divided on participa- 
tion, decided to refer the matter to 
the individual locals. In the “ref- 
erendum” five local unions voted 
against participation, four were in 
favor and two refrained from ex- 
pressing a viewpoint. 

Norman Thomas will be among 
the speakers at the annual May 
Day dinner of the Socialist party 
to be held tonight at the Henry 
Hudson Hotel. May Day celebra-| 
tions likewise are scheduled by the| 





Socialist Labor party at The Pyth-/ construction, 
135 West Seventieth Street,| ment, 
and the Social Democratic Federa-|years of civil 


jan, 


tion in Central Plaza Hall, Second 
Avenue and Seventh Street. 


JAILED IN CLOTHING GOUGE, 


Head of Company Gets 20-Day 
Term in the Workhouse 


Magistrate Charles E. Ramagate 
yesterday in the War Emergency 
Court agreed with an Office of 
Price Administration lawyer that 
jail terms should be imposed on 
retail clothiers who jemand more 
than the ceiling price for their| 
garments, then he imposed a 
twenty-day workhouse term on 


j 





general reporting award, for show- 


ing “ingenuity, initiative and abil- 


jity in sticking to an assignment 
in a series of stories called, ‘Justice 


for a.Guy Named Joe,’ which 
finally freed a man from a peni- 
tentiary who had served twelve 
years on a false charge.” 


TUNNEL EXPERT RETIRES 


L. E. Robbe of Transportation 
Board 40 Years an Engineer 


Louis E. Robbe, tunnel expert on 


the Board of Transportation and 


its division engineer in charge of 
claims and adjust- 


retires today after forty 
engineering and 


service, in World Wars I and II. 
At a buffet luncheon yesterday at 


the board office, 250 Hudson 


Street, he received a camera and 


a brochure of his career. 
A graduate of the Massachus- 


etts Institute of Technology, Mr. 


Robbe started his career with the 


construction of the Pennsylvania 


Railroad tunnels under the Hud- 


json River, then worked for the 


Board of Water and 


Supply, 


started with the Board of Trans- 
portation in 1926 as section en- 
gineer in the construction of the 
Eest River tunnels at Fifty-third 
Street. 
engineer in the building of the 


He was acting division 


Albert Wolko, 47 years old, presi-|Sixth Avenue subway. He lives at 
dent of the Walko Ciothing Com-|143 East Thirty-ninth Street. 


pany, at 37 West 125th Street. 

Wolko, whose home is at 567) 
West 170th Street, had pleaded| 
guilty as the first defendant ar-| 
raigned in the drive against the 
black market in retail clothing 
sales. He also was fined $225 on| 
the nine counts the OPA had) 
lodged against him, and promptly; 
paid the fines. Had he not done 
so he would have had to serve 
another forty-five days in jail. | 

T. Stanley Block, the OPA coun- 
sel, charged that Wolko gouged 
customers of $42.50 and $47.50 for| 
a suit and an overcoat from which 
he had removed ceiling price tags 
of $28 and $32. 

“Only a jail sentence will serve 
as fitting punishment for an of- 
fender like Wolko in the hope it 
will prove a deterrent to other 
blackmarket racketeers of his 
kind,” Mr. Block told the eoust. ¥ 





al 


1, 1946. 


The New Work Zimes 


The New York Times 


WEDNE 


SYNCHROTRON AIDS 


NUCLEAR STUDIES 


New Atom Smasher Expected 
to Speed Electrons to Ener- 
gies of 300,000,000 Volts 


POTENTIAL OF A BILLION 


California University Machine 
is Developed as Scientist in 
Russia Makes Smaller One 


By LAWRENCE E. DAVIES 
Special to Tus New Yoru Ties. 

BERKELEY, Calif., April 30-— 
With the backing of the Manhattan 
District, which produced the 
atomic bomb, the University of 
California has begun construction 
of an atom smasher of a type 
which, according to Berkeley 
physicists, is capable theoretically 
of accelerating high-speed elec- 
tronic “bullets” to energies of a 
billion volts. 

Professor Ernest O. Lawrence, 
director of the radiation laboratory 
and inventor of the cyclotron, said 
today that the new instrument, 
known as the synchrotron, would 
accelerate electrons to energies of 
300,000,000 volts. With a larger 
magnet and orbit, the higher volt- 
age could be achieved, in the opin- 
ion of himself and Professor Edwin 
M. McMillan, ya “theory of 
phase stability” is principle on 
which the synchrotron is based. 

Soviet Russia, where the idea of 
the synchrotron was proposed in- 
dependently by V. Veksler of the 
Academy of Sciences in Moscow, 
is known to be at work on a sim- 


tiona! flower as an expression of|more fitting occasion on which to;inspected the tulip beds, in which/ilar machine of 30,000,000 volts. 


gratitude for this country’s hel 
in liberating Holland. The Dutc 
will celebrate the first anniversary 
of their freedom from German 
domination next Sunday. 

Calling attention to his orange 
lapel ripbbon, Mr. Van Swinderen 
said this emblem, worn in celebra- 
tion of the birthday yesterday of 
Princess Juliana of the Nether- 
lands, illustrated that there was no 


Cheer for the Sick 


“Portable library's here!” The 
east wing of the hospital's fifth 
floor awakens with the pleasant 
announcement. Little Johnny L. 
forgets the pain from his broken 
leg as he selects a baseball story. 
Mr. C. overlooks his troubles 
with the choice of a gripping 
mystery. 

The library is one of the lesa- 
ser-known activities provided by 
the hospitals end related serv- 
ices participating in the Greater 
New York Fund, but its therapeu- 
tic value long has been proven. 

The 415 hospitals and health 
and welfare agencies partly su 

rted by the Fund need §$29,- 

,000 to meet their anticipated 
expenses for 1946. The Greater 
New York Fund appeals exclu- 
sively to business concerns and 
employe groups for $5,900,000. 

upport the Greater New York 
Fund at your place of business. 


[FREE BUS FOR PUPILS 
Y MILE FROM SCHOOL 


Under a new regulation passed 
by the Board of Education, pupils 
in the kindergarten to 2-B grades 
who live half a mile or more from 
their schools will be provided with 
free bus transportation, it was an- 
nounced yesterday by Superintend- 
ent of Schools John E. Wade. Pre- 
viously, the transportation was 
made available to all children in 
the elementary grades who live a 
mile or more from the schools they 
attend. 

The board's action was greeted 
| with tempered satisfaction by par- 
lents living in the Queensbridge 
housing development, Long Island 
City, Queens, who for several 
months have been campaigning for 
school bua service. Their children 
must travel from three-quarters to 
a mile to schools in that area. 

Mrs. Miriam Sayer, president of 
|the Queensbridge Tenants League, 
|declared the board’s move would 
help the situation so far as her 
group was concerned but that the 
parents would continue their ef- 
forts to get the bus service for the 
older children as well. 

A delegation of mothers repre- 
senting parents in the housing de- 
velopment are scheduled to meet 
with Miss Mary E. Dillon, presi- 
dent of the Board of Education, 
today at 5 P. M, at the board's 
headquarters, 110 Livingston 
Street, Brooklyn, it was disclosed 
by Mrs. Sayer. 

The present contract for provid- 
ing school bus transportation to 
pupils who live a mile from school 
will expire on June 30, Mr. Wade 
pointed out in a circular sent to 
principals of elementary schools. 
|Bids for a new contract, he said, 
would be requested in accordance 
with the board’s revised regula- 
tions. 





1,005,184 Sunday Circulation 


Average net paid sale 


of The New York Sunday 


Times in April wae 1,005,184—a new high record and 


a gain of 191,542 over Apr 


il of last year. 


Weekday circulation also hit a new high for the 


month, gaining 35,207 over 


1945 and 123,970 over 19.44. 


The New York Times 


sixty-one varieties were shown. 

Department of Parks officials 
said this was the first display of 
imported tulips in. full bloom since 
before the war. Though some 
bulbs arrived during the war, their 
a ge ng not successful, they 
said. e flowers are planted in 
ten city park areas in Manhattan, 
Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens, be- 
sides Central Park. 


dedicate the flowers. 

Mr. Impellitteri reminded the 
Dutch delegation that “one of our 
greatest Presidents, the late 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, was of 
Dutch ancestry.” Walter Roozen, 
a member of the national commit- 
tee formed ir Holland to collect 
funds for the gift, accompanied 
Mr. Van Swinderen. 

After the presentation the party 


BOYS CLUBS HAILED (|RECORD CITY BUDGET 
AS DEMOCRACY AIDS) RECEIVED BY COUNCIL 


Four hundred delegates to the| The City Council, holding a spe- 
cop egy annual convention of|cial meeting yesterday, received 
the ys Clubs of America were posed * 
told yesterday that they had before i oo $20 1946-47 a of 
them a “God-given” opportunity| $865,222, as approved by the 
not only to enrich the lives of|Board of Estimate, and referred it 
thousands of underprivileged boys|to its committee on finance. The 
but = ae be a — — in|committee will hold a public hear- 
preserving democracy in ca. ; 

William Edwin Hall, a trustee of red . sr ya : mee * M., 
the New York Children’s Aid So- Soe » ane, Waren may 
ciety and for thirty years the decrease but not increase the 
national president of the Boys|budget, has until May 21 to 
Club movement, told the opening|adopt it. 
session at the Hotel Commodore| At its regular meeting, the 
that the boys helped by the clubs/Council passed a local law exempt- 
were for the most part of the class|ing from the provisions of the 
in which subversive leaders hoped|Lyons residence law city employes 
to find their largest following. who joined the armed forces and 

“By offering a program of/|since discharge have had to take 
health, education and character-|up residence outside the city. The 
building to the community's youth|Waiver of residence will continue 
you are planting the seeds of belief|until Dec. 31, 1948. The amend- 
in the advantage of individualiment was sponsored by Council- 
liberty,” Mr. Hall said. man A. J. Phillips, Queens Re- 

Reviewing the history of the/publican. 

Boys Club movement, which on| Two measures to revise the vot- 
April 15 celebrated its fortieth|ing on the Board of Estimate were 
anniversary, he declared: introduced and referred to the 

“The fact that the Boys Clubs of|committee on rules. Mrs. Mae V. 
erica has survived four finan-|Gallis, Queens Democrat, offered a 

depressions and two World)bill that would give the Mayor 
Wars and today is stronger in fi-|four votes, the Controller and 
nance, influence and members|President of the Council three 
would prove that Boys Club must/each, the Borough Presidents of 
have. paid rich dividends in filling|Manhattan, Queens, Brooklyn and 
a basic need in the civil, economic/ Bronx, two each, and of Richmond, 
and humanitarian life in hundreds/one. The bill introduced by @harles 
of communities.” E. Keegan, Bronx Democrat, pro- 

Mr. Hall outlined plans to es-|posed three and one-third votes 
tablish a Boys Club unit in every/each for Mayor, Controller, Presi- 
large city in the country. The/dent of the Council, two each for 
campaign calls for a sustained|Borough Presidents, except the 
publicity drive with an appeal for|President of Richmond, who would 
funds. get one! At present the Mayor, 

Dr. Howard A. Rusk, former di-|Controller, President of the Wour- 
rector of the rehabilitation pro-|cil have three votes, Manhattan 
gram of the Army Air Forces, anjand Brooklyn Borough Presidents, 
associate editor of THE NEW YORK|two, and the other three borough 
TIMES, told the delegates they|presidents, one each. Under sec- 
could obtain outstanding leaders|tion forty of the Charter, these 
and youth representatives among|measures would require a refer- 
the 150,000 returning Boys Club/endum. 
veterans. Councilman L. Garey Clemente, 


~reecemns a lieutenant colonel on terminal 
MORE SCHOOL AID URGED 


leave, was welcomed to his seat in 
ict He the Council. He was elected while 
Public Education Group Calls 
for Increase in Financing 


Am 
cial 


lin the service. 


STREPTOMYCIN FEE LEGAL 


Grand Jury Finds Drug Was Not 
Sold to Girl’s Parents 


At its annua! meeting last night 
in the Engineering Societies Build- 
ing, 29 West Thirty-ninth Street, 
the Public Education Association 
adopted a resolution “urging the 
adequate financing of public edu- 
cation through Federal grants as 
aid to the States and an increase 
in State and local financing.” The 
resolution advocated also that a 
survey be made by members of the 
Board of Education, in association 
with lay leaders, to develop an 
educational pian for New York 
City during the next decade. 

Former Gov. Charles Poletti said 
in an address that “our schools 
must be the first weapons in the 
battle to maintain democracy, tools 
to establish a stronger socio-eco- 
nomic structure, and producers of 
human resources.” Dr. Edward C. 
Lindeman, Professor of Philosophy 
at Columbia University, presided. 

\lished,” Mr. Hogan said, “tha 


ASKS U. S. CUT EMPLOYES 
pte (there was no sale of streptomycin. 


Byrd Group Urges Slash From) 41) moneys paid by the father were 
2,893,670 to 1,650,000 paid as fees for medical consulta- 
— tion. The investigation has also es- 
WASHINGTON, April 30 () —/tablished that there were some ir- 
A Senate-House committee report-| regularities in the use of the drug 
ed today the Federal Government! in this case.” 
had 2,893,670 employes last Jan. A 
31 and recommended that Congress 
require a reduction to 1,650,000 by 
June 30, 1947. 
The Joint Committee on Reduc- 
tion of Non-essential Federal Ex-|30-—The 


District Attorney Frank 8. Ho- 
ean announced yesterday that the 
New York County grand jury had 
decided there had been no viola- 
tion of the law in the fee charged 
the parents of a dying 14-year-old 
girl, a victim of bacterial endo- 
carditis, for the use of strepto- 
mycin, which was credited with 
having saved her life. 


attention of the prosecutor by 
Mayor Edwin Carlin of Rahway, 
N. J., on April 12, who reported 
that the girl's parents had been 
compelled to purchase a small 
quantity of the new drug at exor- 
bitant prices. 

“The investigation has estab- 


Negro on New Rochelle Board 
Special to Tus New Yoru Timea, 

NEW ROCHELLE, N. Y., April 

Rev. Dr. Clarence M. 


penditures informed the House and|Long was appointed today as a 4 


Senate that some of the older Gov-|member of the New Rochelle Board 
ernment agencies had increased|of Education by Mayor Stanfby 
employment while the War and|W, Church. Dr. Long, pastor of 
Navy departments reduced theirs.|the Bethesda Baptist Church here, 

‘Government employment reached|/is the first Negro to serve on the 
a pea kof 3,649,769 in August, |board in this city of 70,000 persons, 
1945, Chairman Byrd said. 


15 per cent of whom are Negroes./% 


With the new instrument, which 
the Berkeley nuclear physicists 
hope to have in operation early 
next year, they expect to cross a 
new threshold in the study of nu- 
clear forces. The nucleus of the 
atom has been altered by the 
heavy projectiles of the cyclotron, 
whose barrages have added or re- 
moved protons or neutrons. 

But Professor McMillan sug- 
gested that with the synchrotron 
it might be possible that, instead; 
of the nucleus itself being split, the 
tiny particles of the nucleus, such 
as protons and .eutrons, would be 
split. 

Prwith particles of these ener- 
gies it will be possible to study 
cosmic rays, or mesotrons,” 
statement from the university said. 
“A 300,000,000 electron volt elec- 
tron is itself a cosmic ray, and 
such a particle will produce cosmic 
ray showers, such as occur in na- 
ture, of equal energy. 

“The understanding of meso- 
tons is consjdered to be of the ut- 
most importance in learning about 
the fundamental nuclear forces. 
Mesotrons, which constantly bom- 
bard the earth at energies up to 
billions of electron volts, can be 
studied at present only on nature's 
terms. 

“Scientists study mesotrons by 
taking photographs of electrical 
showers they create as they travel 
through ai gas-filled container 
called a Wilson cloud chamber. 
Thousands of photographs usually 
myst be taken before one is found 
which has on it a mesotron shower. 
By producing their own mesotrons, 
scientists will be able to study 
these particles under their own 
conditions. Thus much will be 
learned about the mesotron, which 
is believed, in some way yet un- 
known, to constitute the binding 
force, or cement, which holds the 
atomic nucleus in a tight core.” 

Dr. Lawrence said that Profes- 
sor McMillan's “theory of phase 
stability” constituted the most im- 
portant development in the accel- 
eration of particles since the cyclo- 
tron itself was devised. 

The machine now under con- 
struction will operate up to 2,000,- 
000 electron volts as a betatron, 
described as the most effective 
machine operating now as an elec- 
tron accelerator, and at that point 
will begin oneration as a synchro- 
tron. Professor McMillan said that 
at 300,000,000 electron volts the 
particles accelerated would have 
traveled around the orbit 200,000 
times before emerging in a beam. 


OPA Permits General 


| 


SDAY, MAY $1, 1946. 


Mrs. Roosevelt Is Tardy; 
‘Mixed Up’ on Sabway 


Punctuality has not been cus- 
tomary at United Nations meet- 
ings. Mrs. Franklin D. Roose- 
velt, chairman of the Commis- 
sion on Human Rights, was one 
of the first delegates to arrive 
yesterday morning for the meet- 
ing at Hunter College in the 
Bronx. She was  pfeceded 
only by K. C. Neogi of India, 
who was present at the sched- 
uled 10:30 o'clock. 

Mrs. Roosevelt was four min- 
utes late because, she explained, 
“I got mixed up on the subway 
again, but it won't happen an- 
other time.” At 10:39 all four 


HONE RELIEF ROLLS 
BECIN TO INCREAS 


Down to 92,000 Here in War, 
They Are Above 100,000 
Now, but Peak Is Far Off 


MANY GET JOB INSURANCE 


members of the commission were |When Payments Expire, They 


assembled around the confer- 
ence table with Henri Laugier 
of France, assistant secretary- 
general in charge of social af- 
fairs, but the other members of 
the secretariat, the “interna- 
tional civil servants,” had not 
yet arrived. 
Mrs. Roosevelt went quickly 
into the corridor to round them 
up. She got everyone except the 
recording secretary who did not 
arrive until a minute after she 
opened the meeting at 10:41. 


TO AID RALLY FOR OPA 


The Mayor's office sent yester- 
day to 500 civic, community, 
school, labor and fraternal organi- 
zations letters urging participation 
in a “monster citizens’ rally’ to 
retain price and rent control. The 
“Save OPA” raly is to be held on 
Sunday, May 12, at 2 P. M. in 
Lewisohn Stadium at City College. 

Bearing Mayor O’Dwyer's signa- 
ture, the letter said: 

“The people of our city face a 
grave danger. Inflation threatens 
the health and welfare of every 
worker, salaried person and small 
business man. The crippling 
amendments passed by the House 
of Representatives will mean the 
end of price and rent control.” 

The groups were asked to send 
representatives to a meeting in the 
Council Chamber at City Hall on 
Friday at 3 P. M. to plan for the 
mass meeting. Acting Mayor Vin- 
cent Impellitteri and Paul L. Ross; 
the Mayor's administrative secre- 
tary, will be in charge of the pre- 
liminary meeting. 

Mayor O’Dwyer, before going to 
California for a vacation, had ex- 

hope that the rally could 
be held on the mall in Central 
Park. Mr. Ross reported that Park 
Commissioner Robert Moses had 
said that only patriotic and mu- 
sical affairs had been allowed in 
the park. 

Councilman Michael Quill, who 
as head of the CIO Transport 


May Seek Public Aid in City— 
Veterans Among Claimants 


Home relief rolls that had re- 
imained more or less static during 
ithe war, when there was a heavy 
demand for manpower, are begin- 
ning to show a slow but steady 
lincrease, with many of the appli- 
cants for assistance since V-J Day 
jcoming from the ranks of ex-serv- 


lice men. 


CITY ASKS 500 GROUPS 


However, with veterans assured 
jof State unemployment insurance 
|payments of $20 weekly for as 
jmuch as fifty-two weeks, depend- 
jing upon length of service, and a 
majority of unemployed former 
war workers eligible for continu- 
ous State insurance payments for 
several months yet, the City De- 
partment of Welfare does not ex- 
pect to feel the full impact of un- 
employment on its relief rolls until 
the late fall at the earliest. 

Veterans applying for unemploy- 
ment insurance leveled off some- 
what during April after a sharp 
rise that began last October and 
reached a peak during the first 
three months of this year. 

The most recent figures avail- 
able at the New York State De- 
partment of Labor for New York 
City for the week ended April 19 
show that of the total of 264,023 
\claims filed, 152,223 were by vet- 
jerans and 111,800 by non-veterans. 
j|On these claims 136,250 ex-service 
men and 81,820 non-veterans re- 
lceived unemployment insurance 
|payments. 


Rise in Home Relief Rolls 


The city’s home relief roster, 
which was down to 92,000 during 
the war, is now above 100,000. Of 
ithe increase of 2,263 in the case 
load since V-J Day, 1,089 are vet- 
erans, according to Welfare Com- 
missioner Edward E. Rhatigan’'s 
office. 

It was explained that the rea- 
son why relief rolls have not ex~ 
panded greatly as yet is that most 
|of the war workers who lost their 





Workers Union had been promot-|jobs in September were collecting 
ing the rally, demanded to know! the twenty-six weeks of unemploy- 
at yesterday's meeting of the City|ment insurance payments allowed 
Council whether Mr. Moses wasito them on their earnings for the 
Acting Mayor. year ended May 31, 1944. While 
these payments expired last night, 
they are still eligible for another 
twenty-six weeks of payments for 
the year ended May 31, 1945. This 
is the basis for the department's 


BUTLER TO BE HONORED 


Columbia Library to Be Named 


for the President Emeritus 


Columbia University’s South Hall 
Library, built in 1934, will be re- 
named the Nicholas Murray Butler 
Library in honor of Dr. Butler, for- 
ty-three years presidemt of the uni- 
versity and president emeritus 
since last Oct. 1, Dr. Frank D. 
Fackenthal, acting president of 
Columbia, announced last night. 


The library, built in the style of! 


Italian Renaissance and one of the 
most modern libraries in the world, 
was made possible through a gift 
in 1930 by the late Edward 83. 


Harkness. Erected at a cost of| 


about $4,000,000, the building has 


a central book stack capacity of 


nearly 3,000,000 volumes, with pro- 


vision for more than a millon 
more. Special devices insure at- 
mospheric and dust-proof condi- 
tions for the preservation of books, 
special collec- 


manuscripts and 
tions. 


Marine Library Gets Truck 


The American Merchant Marine 
Library Association's annual book 
drive received additiwnal impetus 
yesterday morning when Postmas- 
ter Albert Goldman handed over a 
new book truck and 300 fine vol- 


umes to Mrs. George Emden Roose- 


velt, president of the association, 
in a ceremony at the headquarters! 


of the “Public Library of the Sea,” 
45 Broadway. 
made the 
munity 
Postoffice. 


est of the New 


Motors to Lift Prices 


Of Cars $16 to $60 to Offset Wage Rise 


| WASHINGTON, April 30 @P)— 
|The Office of Price Administration 
announced today rétail price in- 
creases of $16 to $60 for 1946 Gen- 
eral Mctors automobiles. The in- 
creases reflect the recent wage 
increase granted to General Mo- 
tors workers. 

| Factory and retail ceiling prices 
were increased for Chevrolets, 
Pontiacs, Oldsmobiles, Buicks and 
Cadillacs. 

OPA said that some of the 
imcrease has been absorbed by car 
dealers,-but since some factory in- 
creases exceeded the 4.5 per cent 


The case had been called to fhe|maximum dealer absorption, some |4F sedan $1,306. 


increase had to be passed on to 
consumers. 

The _— announced today for 
Chevrolet also” include increases 
for other causes ranging from $51 
to $68 above 1942 prices. Similar 
price increases for other General 


Motors cars were announced April! sed 


11. 

The new retail ceiling prices, 
which do not include excise taxes, 
transportation, preparation and 
handling charges or optional equip- 
ment: 

PONTIAC 

Series Six 1-A Torpedo Six: Chassis 
$703, business coupe $975, sport coupe 
$1,014, sedan coupe $1,053, convertible 
sedan coupe $1,252, two-door seian 
one four-door sedan (éwindow) 


might 1-A Torpedo Bight: 
. business coupe feos. 
pe $1,088, sedan coupe $1,077, 
@ sedan coupe $1,275, two- 
$1,050, four-door sedan 

$1,101, ‘ 
Series Six 1-B Streamliner Six: 
Chassis $738, sedan coupe $1,081, four- 


door sedan $1,141, station wagon 
srongare $1,506, station wagon deluxe 


Series 
Chassis 
sport cou 
convertib 


Series Eight 1-B Sireamliner Bight: 
hassis $782, sedan coupe $1,106, four- 


door sedan $1,166. station wagon 


standard $1,533, station wagon deluxe 
$1,500. 


OLDSMOBILE 
Series 66: Chassis $778, club sedan 


The Postmaster 
tation of the Com- 
York 


belief that the city relief rolls will 
not rise too sharply for the time 
being. 

By the end of the next fiscal 
year, June 30, 1947, Commissioner 
Rhatigan estimated that the home 
relief case load would increase to 
about 165,000. 

“While the rise may seem un- 
precedented,” he said, “that con- 
clusion vanishes when we compare 
our forecast with the situation as 
it existed just prior to the war. In 
June, 1941, six months before Pearl 
Harbor, the Department of Wel- 
jfare gave assistance to 222,000 
cases, 57,000 more cases than our 
| June, 1947, forecast. 

“A year later, in June, 1942, the 
department was still giving assist- 
ance to 185,000 cases, 20,000 more 
than the 165,000 anticipated by the 
end of the next fiscal year.” 


Housing a Big Problem 


Three of the principal problems 
of the department at this time are 
related to the housing shortage, 
Mr. Rhat:gan said. Thé problem 
of finding quarters for the so- 
called marginal workers, or home- 
less cases, is becoming more acute 
each day. These, he explained, are 
persons, in most cases, who take 
an occasional job for a few days, 
and when their funds are gone, go 
back to the department looking 
for a night's lodging. 

With rent allowances for fami- 
lies, deemed adequate before the 
war, now having greatly decreased 
purchasing power, the future prob- 
lem of housing needy families hea 
the department stumped. 

The housing shortage has also 
interfered seriously with providing 
foster homes for children by the 
|\department’s Child Welfare Bu- 
jreau, the Commissioner said. He 
|added that almost 100 babies were 
|being cared for in specially set up 
“well baby” wards in city hosp:tals 
because of the department's inabil- 
ity to obtain foster homes for 
| them. 





$1,079, club coupe $1,057, convertible! “There is 4 crying need for fos- 


coupe $1,288, four-door sedan $1,112 
Series Standard 76: Chassis $882, 
club sedan $1,129, four-door sedan 
$1,189. 

Series Deluxe 76: Club sedan $1,223, 
four-door sedan $1,251. 

Series Standard 78: Chassia $931. 
club sedan $1,178, four-door sedan 


$1,238. 

Series Deluxe 78: Club sedan $1,272, 
four-door sedan $1,330 

Series 98: Chassis $1,013, convertible 
coupe $1,501, club sedan $1,353, four- 


BUICK 

Series 40: Chasaia $857, four-door 
sedan $1,197, sedanet $1,148. 

Series SO: Chassig $975, special 
Chassis $948, four-door sedan £397. 
sedanet $1,328, convertible coupe, $1,- 
500, estate wagon $1,793 

Series 70: assis $1,181, otal 

1, : 


Chassis $1,047, four-door sedan 
anet $1,543, convertible coupe 


$1,830 

CADILLAC 
Series 61: Five-passenger Club coupe 
two-door $1,617, S-passenger sedan 
four-door $1,720 

Series Five- Club 
coupe two-door $1,811, five- 
—— coupe two-door eon 
ive- nger sedan four-door $1,872 

Series 60 Special: Five-passenger 
sedan four-door $2,488. 

Series 75: Five-passenger sedan 
four-door $3,406, seven-passenger se- 
dan $3,650, seven-passenger Imperia! 
ey nine-passenger Business sedan 


375; n 
perial 


asenger 


ine- enger Business Im- 
$3,594. 163. neh commercial 
chassis $1,504. 

CHEVROLET 
Fieetmaster: Town sedan 912, « 
sedan $958, sport coupe $900, 
riolet $1,126. 


Fieetiine: Dynamic sport coupe $933. 
Stylemaster: Chassis with cow! and 
windshield $671, Town sedan $848, 
Business coupe $804, sport coupe $436 


spogt sedan $894. 


rt 
‘ab- 


passenger | 


|ter homes for these babies,” Com- 
;missioner Rhatigan said 

A preliminary report by a child 
|welfare committee appointed by 
|Mayor O'Dwyer from among rep- 
jresentat:ves of the Catholic, Jew-~- 
jish and Protestant faiths and from 
the Children’s Court to recommend 
a blueprint on methods for child 
care in the city has been submitted 
to the Mayor. He is expected to 
iggue a statement on it when he 
returns from his California vaca- 
tion. 


CONVICTED 75 TIMES 


Panhandler, Asking for Time to 
Enjoy Spring, Gets 30 Days 


David Turbitt, 59 years old, who 
gave his address as 438 East Twen- 
ty-fifth Street, brought his police 
record up to exactly seventy-five 
convictions yesterday when he 
jpleaded guilty in Mid-Manhattan 
| Magistrates Court to soliciting 
alms in the street. Court attend- 
ants believed the prisoner had ea- 
tablished a record police record 

Magistrate Maurice Simmona, 
who sentenced Turbitt to thirty 
days in the workhouse, lent a sym- 
pathetic ear to the man’s plea that 
he be released in time to enjoy the 
|spring weather. Turbitt’s record 
lrevealed that he had appeared be- 
fore almost every city magistrate 
|since 1913, and that he has out- 
lived a score of those who had sen- 


tenceg him 





Chapin Named Avs CARRIBRS RESTUDY | ..S%!82.0°7_ ONION LEVY SOUGHT 
we Fon Wet RAL STRIKE SSUES bo ga ON FOOD DBLIVERY =vese ae 


sg ty ; . goods. If he did not join, he would Eye-Bank to Open Branch 
AFL Tells Detroit Merchants have to pay $2 if he were a mem-| The Kye-Bank for Sight Restora- 
ber of the Grocers Association tion, Inc., where eye tissue is re- 
and $5 if he were an “independent 
to obtain a permit for the delivery | °*'ved and distributed for cornea! 
of merchandise. grafting, will open its first branch 
Mayor Edward J. Jeffries prom- bank this month in Chicago, it was 
ised police protection: for grocers announced yesterday y Mrs. 
who refuse to pay a/ Henry Breckinridge, executive di- 
rector of the organization. The 
new bank, to be situated itn the 
Cook County (Iil.) General Hos- 


stitute our organizational drive” at a packinghouse to pick up a 
unless the grocers and meat deal-|iong of meat, a member of the 
ers opened contract negotiations. (ts,mster’s union said: 


Other spokesmen for the union; , 
said that if a merchant joined the| You can get meat for a $2 per- 


| PHONES WITHHELD 
GALLERIES - Inc} BY 2 UNIONS’ ROW 


30 E.578T- ZONE 22 
, , 4 Jurisdictional Dispute Keeps 
Public Gfuction Sales I| :@eivise ‘Seaenenmaiaal 


‘ Housing Development 
Sale Coday al 2 p.m. . ae 


VALUABLE 1 A fresh outbreak of jurisdic- 
Precious-Stone 


JEWELRY 


‘ International Brotherhood of Elec- 
5 trical Workers, AFL, and the Tele- 

All Private Owners* 
*Exempt From 20% Federal Tax 


PARKE-BERNET 


Chicago Parley !s Suspended 
to Enable Both Sides to 
* Clarify Their Positions 


re 


By WALTER H. WAGGONER 


They Must Join to Get 
Supplies for Public 


Special to Tas New Youre Timas. 
= ygnare e aoe 0 — About es ae ion for having th 
un or having thei: 
6,008 yore stony ~r — weet. The Mares said, 
dealers joined forces today agai a end anyone 
what they alleged was an attempt = EP pene il or ex-| pital, will be operated with the 
jcooperation of the Chicago Oph- 


of Senta Cari Waren 
eure, Gerald K. O’Bri assistant| thalmological Society. Mra. Breck- 
be pers of prosecutor, stated oe one grocer’ inridge » tar that the demand 

ly. 

r= reget phy | apne my _ complained that when he appeared for eyes stil exceeded the ae y 


store owners to become members 


phone Employes Union, an inde- 

§ pendent organization, representing 
} installation and maintenance men 
jemployed by the New York Tele- 
phone Company, is depri ten- 

* ants in four newly comple units 
} of the Clinton Hill housing project 
service, 


Sale Conight at & p.m. Wit became known yesterday otal 
: ¢ controversy over 
MODERN 
PAINTINGS 


union has the right to install tele- 
phone wire in the buildings is sim- 
SAKLATWALLA AND 
OTHER OWNERS 


of families in the Parkchester 
s housing development in the Hast 
ONow On Exhibition 
The Magnificent 


Bronx without phone service for 
nearly two years and has delayed 
Collection of 
ITALIAN 


¥ the installation of phones at the 
|Idlewild Airport since last fall. 

MAJOLICA 

Formed by the Late 


ADVERTISEMENT = 


Involved the question of 

whether labor unions can levy a 

ia} tax upon business enterprises for 

a the delivery of merchandise which 

gned \# to be sold to the consuming pub- 

pr ntl Png oy ty A 

right to business with- 

one informant, who added tha retiring from her post in the Treas- 

the cipants appeared to be|""Y Department. She reached the) spokesman for 


Negotiations which are being)|™ 
carried A — avast a notion cess Helen B. Smith, . 
roads or checks for Presidents and Sen-|*" 
18 by the two brotherhoods wor for on 
been exploratory 


ADVERTISEMENT 


A spokesman for the Clinton each other out.” compulsory retirement age of 70 
oy tke acitekie hits Aatioanad Atmosphere Called “Friendly” |*fter fifty-two years in Govern: 
b e e Assurance 
in upper stories of two of the new uarters that talks of this explora-|*!#0 served notice on carriers for join the union, he would have no 
buildings are being kept vacant by pal Church, effective Aug. 1, the/tory nature would continue for a|® Wage increase, and the fifteen| goods to sell. 
the inability of the contractors to/4irector, the Rev. Dr. James Thay-|couple of days before the con-|non-operating groups, union mem-| The association has called a 
f obtain delivery of elevators from|er Addison, announced yesterday. |ferees would get down to issues, bership amounts to 1,750,000. meeting for tomorrow night at 
° the Westinghouse Electric Corpo-| Dr. Addison, vice president of t seemed to be) «am. three Brotherhoods of Fire- which action will be taken to op- 
Mortimer ® ‘ration, where a strike hes been in|the council, made the announce-|that it was the wish of some 00) oes ond Tenia Gatttes ath — the union demand. About 
progress since Jan, 15. ment at the first session of three|/the Brotherhood members that the) nes yg por wen 
i| The shafts were designed for|days of meetings, at the Russell|/negotiations take a more specific carriers ginally 
SCHIFF . iw. house equipment and it is|Sage Foundation, 130 East Twen-|turn, with terms of the settlementiagreed to arbitration, but had)with city authorities today, alleg- 
linpoantihe to substitute another|ty-second Street. more clearly in mind. called a strike for March 11 so that extortion. “Don't waste wheat,” asks 
possi ty 
Sale May 4 at 2 p.m [faa Presiding Bishop Beary Stl nance Media, huntnase agent Ser Sun, Jouwe 
" ff others were availa George Tucker announ further complicated finding board handle Teamsters Council! ome 
‘representative said. is Bishop Charles L. Reifsnider,) Thursday, when the chairmen of te the dis-| warned that the union would “rein- they're finkes of 
d have to wait a year|the Phili es next fall. He will|last until the middle of the month, 
Untt ail construction om the proj-|be accompanied by Dr. Lewis B.lit was stated, Chiefs of the fifteen|™men and Engineman, Conductors 
ect is finished. Franklin, council treasurer, and by|unions have asked the three re-| 4. +, arbitration, had alee asked 
Local $ does not dispute the/the Rev. Dr. Robert A. Magill of/gional organizations of the car-|/. nanges in rules, They decided 
t telephone com Lynchburg, Va. riers, the eastern, the western and & . y 
right of the phone pany Ls later to postpone demands for 
, employes to install the phones, but) The eev. Almon R. Pepper, ex-/the southeastern, for a final meet-| 10. changes until the wage issue 
contends that AFL electricians|ecutive secretary of the council’s|ing on May 27. had been anttied 
Give Generously lhave the right under a “gentle-|division of Christian social rela-| The fifteen non-operating unions a eens lL AS 
‘men’s agreement” of thirty years’|tions, reported that half of the represent machinists, boilermak- Forrestal to Be Speaker 
to The standing to do the pre $617,132 authorized to help sister|¢rs, blackamiths, sheet metal work-| 5° A ty wollen 
wiring since the pro is not yet|churches abroad, re ess fers, electrical workers, car men, SOASY GE INS NSVy com 4 
and the company take the view instaliments. The council approved|clerks, maintenance-of-way em-jat exercises May 16 marking the 
NEW YORK FUND 175th anniversary of the founding 
of the Society of the New York 
for Lecal 


Express Dispute Board Named 
WASHINGTON, April 30 UW) — 


vanes —— ment servi Times 
P vice. The New York ‘ 
weet 5 was not the only way; Major Frank L. Titus, Army)|ty, anda esman for the unions dium of permits 
the project was suffering from|chaplain, has been appointed as-jremarked today that he thought/Brotherhoods representing locomo- Payment of $2 or $5, which would 
q labor difficulties, in which it was|sistant to the director of the Over-|some more progress had tive firemen and enginemen, con-|itver food rom hag mp » a 
4 ca t in th le of “innocent by- . e e 
caugh e role nt by-|seas Department of the National — le it was believed In some(@Uctors and switchmen, which have| 
Sales Conducted by H.H.PARKE []| How long the 300 families who| formerly of North Kwanto, Japan, committees representing each of oho pero san ed a 
. H.E. RUSSELL, JR + L.5. MARION ff now live in the four buildings will| would leave the West Coast Friday|fifteen non-o unions con- y reques wage at Lh ADVERTISEMENT 
and A. N. BADE 'be required to wait for telephones|for Japan to confer with church/Vene for the purpose of di crease of 30 cents, or about 25 per cunsseeeone ste 
was a question no one could an-/ heads. & request for a 14-cent-an-hour in-jcent, and forty-four changes in 
q 
swer yesterday, but there seemed| Dr. Addison will head a com-) Crease. working rules. 
that all phases of the work come) the project and its continuance in-|ployes, telegraphers, signalmen, 
‘under the jurisdiction of the tele-| definitely. Boat captains and engineers, long- 
‘are already occupied. one ms terday. The ceremonies will be v ; 
H |. Health and The owners, fearful that a deci- Membership of 1,750,000 held inthe lounge of the hospi- 
ospita ¥ 6a a With the Brotherhoods of Loco-|tal's Nurses’ Residence, 1320 York 
Welfare Needs 
April 293—June 7 
t 
New York Has Cares of lis 


f stander.” Two hundred apartments) Gouncil of the Protestant Episco- ublic, If the merchant refused to 
more than an even chance that/mission to visit China, Japan and) These separate negotiations may| pie three brotherhoods of fire- 
sion to permit the telephone com- 
Own—New York Cares for 


lts Own 


LAFAYETTE 
HWaniomaL BAEK 


of Brooklyn, In New York 


100 LIVINGSTON STREET 
@? Lafayette Ave. « 1273 Fulten St. 
525 Ninth Ot © 6614 Bay Parkway 

Member Federal Reserve tem and 

Pederai Deposit Insurance 


RUG CLEANING 


HIGHEST QUALITY STANDARDS 
71 Years under Same Management 
Courtesy, prompt service and 
feir prices © Liberal insurance 
aes yh yen includes 

chester Queens ~ Fire- 
prool 


pleat 
J. & J. W. 
WILLIAMS, ine. 


MOtt Neves 9-2330 
136 Lest 144th Street 


RAINBOW LOUNGE 


470 1 Pm BARY GICEPT SUNDAYS AND MOLMArS 
© A le Carte Mens 

ek © Tabie Whote Tes 

Yo © Corktelte 

RK Witte Ader Ermrmide 


RCA Building © GStn Ficer South 
ROCKEFELLER CENTER 


pany to start installing phones 
j will be followed by a walkout of 
jall AFL construction workers 
jthroughout the project, have re- 
fused to give the telephone com 
|pany a “go-ahead” on the work. 


| Skilled hands and trained minds 





are in constant demand. Learn 
highly trade with the 
Marine Single men 117-26 
apply 388 Ave. 


BAN BY MUSICIANS 
BLOW TO TELEVISION 


Continued From Page 1 


particular significance in the ra- 
|dio industry since they came after 
jadoption of the new Federal law 
intended to relieve a broadcaster 
of hiring more musicians than he 
‘needs. Mr. Petrillo’s union has in- 
\dicated, however, that it will test 
the constitutionality of the new 
‘law in the United States Supreme 


| Mr. Petrillo, who was in Chi- 


cago yesterday, took up the 
walen’s relations with the televi- 
sion and FM industries in a es 
article, addressed to the a- 
tion's members, in the new 

of the union's official organ, 
International Musician, 

here yesterday. 

“The introduction and develop- 
ment of television presents the 
same threat to employment of mu- 
isicians as did the Gangs em 
silent to sound movies,” . Pe- 
|trillo wrote. ro- 
gresses from one stage to another, 
\it is apparent that movies will pla 
|a great part in ite future and that 
jit is pecuiet> te peeees the major- 
lity of te on in 
| ‘canned’ form, thus ting all 
| radio employment, 
| “You all know, th 
‘experience, that when 
‘and, Movietone were installed in 
the theatres of the 


————— 


__ ADVERTISEMENT _ 


HELP WANTED 


President Truman named today 
the three members of an emer- 
gency board to investigate a dis- 
pute between the Railway Express 
Agency and three unions. The 
members are Isiah Leo Sharfman, 
chairman of Michigan University’s 
Economics ent; Leverett 
Edwards, Okl City attorney, 
and Robert W. Woolley of Wash- 
ington, former member of the In- 
terstate Commerce Commission. 


and Canada we lost the employ- 
ment of 18,000 musicians almost 
jovernight. 
| “The American Federation of| 
Musicians is determined to avoid 
&@ repetition of that tragic experi-| 
ence, and until we find out exactly 
where we stand (by that, I mean 
whether television is to destroy our 
employment in radio, or whether 


it is going to put men to work,| 


or other means found where 
jemployment opportunities will 
be lost), we are not going to render 


motive Engineers and Trainmen 


Avenue. Mayor O'Dwyer also is to 


now negotiating, and three other|be a speaker. . 


ee 


The bank with... 


. 


services in the making of televi- 


sion. 


in line again 
talk, we deserve the 
“Television is not 


livelihood and not just for 
of it, the better we will 
In insisting that standard 
grams should not be carried on FM 
charge or extra 
he be- 
leved the union's ruling against 
such @ practice was “sound until 
such time as the radio people have 


United States he added. 


‘receiving tellers’! 


That’s the number of mail boxes in Greater New 
| York, and any one will get your deposit to us quickly 


and conveniently if you 


have a Spécial Checking 


Account at any of the 69 offices of Manufacturers 


Trust Company 
“The only charge is 10/ 


amount. 


. No minimum balance is 


a check, regardless of the 


Enjoy the safety, convenience and prestige of 
carrying your personal account with one of 
America’s largest banks. It's a great saver of your 
time and energy. No more running around town 
and standing in line to pay bills. You can do it by 


STARVE? 


It need not—if the American people speak up to com- 
pel the Allied governments to help before it is too late. 


These are the facts 


“The basic ration in Vienna has 
dropped within the past weeks 
from ite former level of 1550 calo- 
ries and its newly fixed limit of 


. 1200 calories to an 805. calories ra- 


tion.” 
(New York Times, Apiil 11, 1946) 

“Herbert Hoover stated today 
that Austria, on the 1200 calories 
ration planned for the coming 
months, will be on the same food 
level as the hardest hit country he 
has visited, which is Poland... 
A report prepared by Gen. Mark 
Clark's staff noted that the tuber- 
culosis rate had increased steadily 
the past winter. The birth rate was 
about one fourth of the death rate, 
but the cut in rations was expected 
to increase the death rate.” 

(New York Times, April 16, 1946) 

“In January 1946 there. were 
three times as many deaths as in 
the monthly average of the war 
years. Eighty percent of the infants 
show symptoms of incipient rick- 
ets. Ninety percent of the children 
are underweight, undernourished 


and anemic.” 


(From the report of the President of 
the Vienna Chamber of Labor on the 
conditions in Lower Austria.) 


“After May 25 the exhaustion of 
food stocks of the UNRRA will 
throw Austrians back on their own 


food resources of 230 calories a 
day—a diet on which a man would 
die in four to six weeks.” 


(Col. John M. Mynes, acting chieé of 
the UNRRA in Vienna—New York 
Times, April 28, 1946.) 


NEVERTHELESS 


The four occupation sones of the 
tiny country are closed to each 
other, so that even the small sur- 
pluses that may exist in one part 
cannot be transmitted to the areas 
of greatest distress. The huge oe- 
cupation armies are a heavy burden 
on the country. As President Ren- 
ner of Austria said: “Never in the 
history of mankind have so few 
been guarded by so many.” 

The ill-defined reparations clause 
of the Potsdam Declaration threat- 
ens to deprive Austria of ite main 
economic resources. It prevents 
the reconstruction of the country 
whose independence is our de 
clared policy as stated in the Mos- 
cow Declaration of 1943. 


Relief is held up. The United 
States mails do not accept 
food and medicine parcels to 
Austria, although such par- 
cels may be sent to almost all 
former Axis satellites. 


The relief work of “Care,” initiated 
by the American relief agencies 
and distributing army food sur- 
plus in the needy countries, is not 
permitted to operate in Austria. 


mail—even to opening your account. Get in touch 
with our nearest office today. 


Manufacturers 


TrustCompany 


Principal Office: 55 Broad Street, New York 15, N. Y. 
Member Federal (ap ons Inve rance Co poration 


Mell in Envelope or Paste on 1 
Post Cerd or Phone HAnover 2-7 


100 SELFISH PEOPLE’ 


*(Whe want te protect themselves and their families against CANCER) 


Te Underwrite or Assist in Financing 
A Program Aimed at Stamping Out 
A GRAVE NATIONAL THREAT 
AFFECTING 17,000,000 AMERICANS 
Doomed to Die 
UNLESS WE SUCCEED IN OUR FIGHT 
FOR AN ALL-OUT FIGHT AGAINST CANCER! 


TO DATE our activities aod sponsorship have re- 
sulted in the introduction jnte both Houses of Con- 
gress of the Necly-Pepper Bille (H. R. 4502 and 5. 
1875) providing for Government action against 
CANCER on the same level as was used in Govern- 
ment-sponsored Atomic Bomb Research. Committee 
hearing dates have been set for May 7th and 8th. 


Dectors, scientists and lay persons of minence 
from all parts of the country have woline in gw. testify. 


FUNDS Needed to Finance PUBLICITY CAMPAIGN 
To enemre the puts to i @ eee 
tatives urging favorable action om these 


YOU WILL BE AMAZED AT THE LITTLE 
THAT’S NEEDED TO ACCOMPISH $O MUCH. 


WRITE, WIRE OR CALL 
SPONSORS OF GOVERNMENT ACTION AGAINST CANCER 
— ae emit Chairman, Griffin Bidg., 80 Franklin St., N. Y. 13 ee he a ee OE SEE ae 
” “ . ‘ 


al 
« 


Austria needs our help—before it is too fate 


We are anxious to have the way made open for help to reach our 
friends in the ranks of Austrian Labor who fought Fascism, and 
to help the widows and children of those who died on Hitler's 
gallows and in his concentration camps, We ask for your help to 
this end now, before it is too late. 


Write to your Congressman and to the Postmaster General and 
ask him to support our demand for help for Austria. Ask him 
that at least those who are willing to help be permitted to do ro. 
Write to us that you want to join our effort to open the doors 
for relief for Austria. 


FRIENDS OF AUSTRIAN LABOR 


FRIENDS OF AUSTRIAN LABOR, 
150 West 104th, New York 25, M. Y. 
{ l euppert your aims and I would like te contribute § 


Some of the members of 
eur National Committee: 


Leonard Bernstein 
Dr. E. Norrie Bradbury 
Bishop Ralph S. Cushman 
Dr. Andrew H. Dowdy 
Hon. Marriner 5. Eccles 
Hon. James A. Farley 
Rev. Dr. Samuel Goldenson 
William M. Holmes 
Hea. Cordell Hull 
Hea. Julius A. Krug 
Canada Lee 
John L. Lewis 
Dr. Rudolph Matas 
Murray 





Cel. Stafford Warren 
Oreon 


Welles 
ADOLF STURMTHAL, President 


Professor at Bard College 


FREDERICK JAHNEL, Vice President ADDALSS 


NAME 


ee 
$ 


w 
* a 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


LEWIS THREATENS. |U. S. Chamber Board, Divided, |"[NVESTING IN MAN’ | THE DAY 18 WASHINGTON HY ATT ACE SEES RISE |» event tnee trey may. nove to ator Yonah Pay and Representa 


flee overnight to a place of safety.|tive Brooks Hays directing the De- 


HARD COAL STRIKE) Delays Wagner Labor Act:Plea) BY CHARITY URGED) ,.vass=arex. "sort »»— TN SUBURBAN FARMS) %* rs 22 sre sein oe 2ew-narense ot Commer Agri 


° ° o,¢ port of the Anglo-American a higher percentage of the Jewish| developing “backward” areas. 
Serves Notice on Government Resolution for Repeal, Facing Opposition, Community Service Society porns agg ‘ew jeeps | ‘Secretary Expects Decentral-/P*0Ple are on the ee ae cme mane ce 
75.000 Pennsylvania Miners | to Be Revised—Business and Government Reports Help to 71,649, | 100,000 Jews into Palestine. | ized Industry to Spur Land : oy — velop into a great Jewish agricul- 


i i ° s at Peak President Truman saw Re Use by Factory Workers ‘tural university. 
Will Walk Out in 30 Days Leaders Point Way to Recovery Sees Need sentatives Welch. and. Engel, | yim tbe now coming te the time when there, “Ten,” he added, “the Jewish 
—— ES EOS ET RF dng Maw of Bee with | must be ntralization in our spirit will flow back again to the 
B EPH A. LOFTUS A policy of “less investment in| Senator Murdock and Represen- | Secretary of Commerce Henry highly industrialized life. More and land, the land from which it de- 
dena ian Vorx fses By trees pes en things of life and more in man come ng ne eye ete a \A. Wallace predicted last night a/more of our workers in the citiée| rived ita greatest strength when 
WASHINGTON, April 30—Soft Gpectal rye , ppine Resident Commission- are going to -time farmers,|the Jewish race was born, the 
coal negotiations made no progress| ATLANTIC CITY, N. J., Apriljtion and full employment. He urged meant , Thr ray age oe yer hon or Samus end ethers fef the = a 4 —t poenien -< pared eau ek. tom Bog vor Sean eliehich predensd Auten, who of afl 
today as the strike of 400,000/30—After speakers before the|Temoval of wartime subsidies and/nex signing of the Philippine Trade |" ”’ \land on the outskirts. More andithe prophet was the most pas- 
miners ended its first month, and/Chamber of Commerce of ‘the|°Otrolasor ture as soon as/of the Community Service Society,| and Rehabilitation Bills. \ber of part-time farmers. He r@-|more of our industrial areas are sionate exponent of social justice.” 
President John L. Lewis of the|ynited States today emphasized they were no r needed. made public yesterday by Walter; The Senate continued deBate ceived the award of the National/going to be decentralized. Mod-| Dr. Daniel A. Poling, editor of 
United Mine Workers, American's. jeea tor cooperation by Govelum pe ee enaations to back! Gitford, chairman of the board| on the British loan and com- |Farm’ School for “outstanding/ern transportation, electricity and|The Christian Herald, recalled that 
Federation of Labor, served notice) pe ? up full production with other Mens-! 6 trustecs, and Bayard F. Pope, pleted action on a measure pro- (service to agriculture” at a dinner |4tomic energy will see to that. So/Rabbi Krauskopf in founding the 
of a probable walkout of 75,000/¢™ment, labor, industry and agri-jures, in order to keep an “inevita-|,,, t viding for a Federal-State pro- jin the Hotel Waldorf-Astoria|#!#0 will the very nature and de-|school provided that it should 
hard coal miners in thirty days. jculture to speed up production, the ble” rise in prices over the next “It is now more than ever im- of airport construction. marking the fiftieth anniversary sire of man himself. /admit ‘Jewish lads and other 
Paul Fuller, Labor Department|Chamber’s board of directors to- a oe ape Out Of! verative that the essentials for| The Senate recessed at 6:54 P.M. (of the school’s establishment in| Mr. Wallace said he was inter-' lads. 
conciliator assigned to the soft|night deferred action on a resolu-|i tive esce rom my Av b Peet. making good homes and thus good/ Until noon tomorrow. Doylestown, Pa, 0 
coal case more than a month 8g0,/+i5n that in its original form re- 8 H eth peer oa Unj.|human beings be within of| The House met at noon, ending Albert M. Greenfield, a trustee 
resigned from the service out of|\o+eqiv called for repeal of the Sart . Slichter, Harv all,” the report of the family and| ® ten-day recess, and adjourned [of the school, said the award had 
dissatisfaction with Secretary Waaner Act. pean renege t . health agency said. “Neither New at 1:45 P.M. out of respect to been voted to Mr. Wallace because 
Schwellenbach’s handling of the" Direrences of opinion among Pi trey on Slichter's other American city| the late Chief Justice Harlan F. |of his success in producing hybrid 
His resignation, effective tonight,|DO%"d members were reported sufficiently equipped with the) Stone. oes ee HOUSING 
he pe seis re rt ne Cir | When their executive session ad : 7 eee — of — farmers 
ser acknowledged he agreed )our at the close of the first gen-|. During its 1944-45 fiscal year, The Secretary recalled that the : is ; —— 
to think it over some more. eral session of the thirty-fourth , the report related, the society, wi To find suitable living quarters is as much o 
At the Capitol, Representatives inual convention. It was an-|.7,,eeP the demand for goods!neadquarters at 105 East Twenty-| agency's activities in training ad-|seph Krauskopf of Philadelphia at a problem for a business as for a family .., 
Smith of Virginia introduced a bill vounced officially that sections of O° the Part of the Government to) second Street, gave “life-restoring| ditional case workers and the de-|the suggestion of Count Leo Tol- 
t» prohibit what he described 83 the resolutions would be rewritten a minimum. help” to 71,649 persons in 27,258 velopment of a nursing project stoy to provide training in agricul- and perhaps even more vital. 
the “extortion of tribute or royal-|anq that the document probably |r ine Ofsice of Price Administra |Manhattan, Bronx and among thirty-two families in Chi- ture for Jewish farmers. Mr.’ ea ; 
Gorm by shee  entene “es, a » condl- | would be made public tomorrow |°f the Office of Price Administra-|families—about the same number|Ssine, Wallace urged increasing partic-| The location and facilities of Industry City 
eneatied tex Heels ante nation.” | morning. Pata eae IE ad 4. Keep production costs from Almost 60 per cent of the groups) Peuon by Jews in American farm- are so outstandingly attractive that space in 
Was HAERSE TES rising rapidly, or reduce them. | it was pointed out. seeking aid required no financial|""®, |. never been able to see. these 16 modern buildings is always in 


The bill is aimed at such de- 
. |the board had agreed to eliminate ~. assistance, it was observed, and at 
a the UMW’'s for th - Mr. Jackson said it was incon ded. 50.554 had . , ” “ | . : 
tien of © health and welfare fend. Seen or repeal of ibelceivable that this country would OF Sass alten, 50 Prob-| the end of the agency's fiscal year|stonding _ 8. pon a = demand. Occasionally, however, openings 
ante geet BaD 5 poche belever reach @ stage in the foresee- ye Now ech city ne \ploits should be confined to the| occur. If you are seeking a better location, 


No Intervention Forecast (was not final. It can still belabie future where it would not 
said. This figure was a slight in- A financial statement showed an N¢®? East. To me there is some-| : : > : : : 
why not investigate? An inquiry, direct or 
crease over that of the preceding}: .come from contributions, invest- ae pee appropriate about | y 4 quiry 


At the White House, Charles fought out on the floor of the con-|want “more and more production.” 
Ross, Presidential secretary, said vention if its proponents wish to! “Our problem is not that we will 
there was “no indication here” that carry it that far. The majority,/ryn out of things to make,”, he 
President Truman would intervene ‘however, consider it would be Ill-| said. “On the contrary, it is the ef- 


the 


ws making an equal success through your broker, is in order always. 
’ 


mente and other assets of $2,541,-/ the land here in the United) 


year. 
About 18 per cent of those)o99 and ex 

A penditures of $2,759,149. 

helped consisted of families of The operating deficit of $217,917 States. 


in the coal strike. The comment|advised to press such an issue at! fectj ization of our juc- ‘ 
was made in response to informa-|a time when business wants the|tive facilities, men and machines poet Thc aes alien anrcans and| ¥@# made up from capital funds. | ¢ the United States make’ thatr 
tion that Mayor Edward J. Kelly|cooperation of labor for all-out/know-how and organizational) ss ,sncial assistance were given for OMB ISG PE Y ast living by working the land. This 
of Chicago had telegraphed the production. genius, so as to make more of the/ needs such as health care, con- Thomas Mann Better (20 per cent is the seedbed for 
President urging his intervention. | It was reported in responsible|things for which the world is valescence, clothing and work Special to Tus New Youre Trans, nearly half the next generation. 

As the second of two negotiating quarters that the original form of | clamoring.” uipment, counsel regarding em-| LOS ANGELES, April 30—|Why shouldn't 20 per cent of the 
conferences ended this afternoon the resolution called for all States} As major obstacles to full ployment, retraining, and problems; Thomas Mann, Nobel Prize-win-|Jewish people also live on the 
at the Labor Department, Charles to be urged to enact their own la-|duction he mentioned artificial connected with their family life|ning author, is “doing very well"|iand? The Jewish people have al- 
O'Neill, one of the operators’ rep- bor relations laws and for the re-|ceilings, labor troubles and Gov-|ang relationships,” according to the|at the University of Chicago's Bill-|ways been welcome and safe here 
resentattives, described the meet- peal of the Wagner Act as a Fed-\ernment fiscal policies, and sald) enort. ings Hospital after his operation|in the United States. They have 

as aon pn bny a lit eral Jaw after those enactments. (all were tied ig together. e fifty-page document, enti-|for a chest condit‘on last Wednes-|a common share in our proud heri- 
there was ‘enything more definite ay sald to reflect ene Veterans’ Probleme Cited a ae er iSiis by De Vrodaiek Roccntaal! Tee oy 
in the negotiations now than there | position of recent years in support; General Bradigy said that unless lations,” was compiled by Stanley| today by Dr. Frederick Rosenthal.’ “They don’t have to keep their 
was on April 10. That was the of collective bargaining provided|the production of housing, cloth- ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT 
date on which Mr. Lewis walked | an individual has the option to join|ing and certain other consumer aeRO RAND GUNNERS SCART NN RONEN “HORT NOP tt mis ed 
ot. of the pant wage: ont erences. jor not to join @ union. goods in short supply se ss 
r. O'Neill replied that “there Draft Dela and unless prices are held in c 
is nothing more definite than there | Action on yed “many of our 
was March 12.” That is the date| At the membership meeting ac-/grants to veterans will not accom- 
the wage conferences began. tion was deferred on a resolution /pjish the for which they 
Overtime Pay an Issue to extend the Selective Service Actiwere desi od ad 

until May 15, 1946, until the policy| The disbursement of more than 

At the noon recess the operators! committee answers a question put |$7,000,000,000 in 1946 and 1947 for 
said that Mr. Lewis had refused from the floor whether it hadinensions and other benefits, he 
to discuss a new contract until a taken into consideration the possi-|went on, will increase the real na- 
settlement of claims for some over-| ble induction of eighteen-year-olds. |tional income to some extent, but 


time pay last year is reached. This The policy committee drafts reso-|aiso will boost inflationary pres- + | 
amounts to a total of about two lutions, after which the board of/gures to the extent that veterans BO Bae 
days’ pay. |directors decides whether to sub-\add their requirements to existing . 
The operators said this issue was' mit them to the membership. demands for — 
referred on March 27 for settle-/ The members adopted a number; He said veterans’ ability to find 
ment on district levels, but that of resolutions, incl & one favor-|satisfactory employment will de- 
Mr. Lewis now is barring discus- ing elimination of price controls,| pend, in the last analysis, on gen- 


sion of other subjects until the generally by Oct. 31, 1946, and of!eral economic prosperity. 


overtime issue is settled. jrent controls by March 31, 1947.| Secretary Anderson said that the " 
The operators also said that they Expected opposition to this meas-| fundamental answer to the farm- 
had offered to refer the question|ure did not materialize. er’s major problems is nation-wide ‘ 
to arbitration and that Mr. Lewis| Other resolutions adopted advo-| high productivity and full employ- 
refused. Asked about this, Mr. cated revision of the Surplus War|ment and an active world com- 
Lewis commented: Property Act to speed up the dis-| merce to back them up. , 
“It is certainly true it was dis-| posal of war supplies and plants; Without these, he observed, no tH 


— ~ eet and yester-in the public interest, supported/branch of the economy could be 
wh — certainly true they owe this Government's program for) self-sustaining very long. He called 
t to the miners. It is certainly feeding the hungry of Europe and/for a of cooperation by 
~— the miners can use it. |Asia, and favored cooperation with | labor, Nalestry, culture and 
Z cotbchoeey = a pian the United ations to prevent an-|government aimed at “producing 
strike Wednesday night over the|” Willies “yg vice poest-laud said “he Daped’ that ful em- 
American Bresdeasting ——- at dent of the chamber and vice pres-| ployment would provide the solu- 

o'clock, Eastern Standard Time. ident and general counsel of the tion of the problems of agriculture 

Interconnected Power Urged (United Fruit Company, -who deliv- without special “props and con- 

In a letter which reflected the|Srganization of the comiapeteate tise Bess Bloodworth, 
Government's concern about theiities for greater production to|president of the Namm Store, 
coal stoppage, John D. Small,| meet the demands of the American Brook urged top management 
Civilian Production Administrator,|,.opie and the outside world.|in puntness to recognize its social , 
urged interconnected electric power) 
systems to concentrate thelr pro-(ne cautioned against monepoiitil responsibility, and te sake special cee grtene i anngatinn tegen tied taeda 0.2. te Shs Reyes Sareapedae 
duction as far as practicable at) resul undreds uld gi union—a private o 
Eeneraling Plants where efficiency munnea of labor which Would In-/t thelr WORKATR tem ee en ee 
2 teh ene coal stocks are as A warning that four to five mil-|Jersey spoke at a dinner tonight | of thousands of workers in other industries na - x to see can people 

on jo ave 0 ori management-labor relations in i : the with the money. 
bh rer pet oe Janet my —— ~ an next os — utilities. The convention ti wn — forced = fo idleness; and ” p waee pleases y 
. avoid a ng unemploymen continue tomorrow and nation faces most serious crisis since the end . 
The fund established by this royalty tax would 


changing electricity between sys- 

“. problem, and that increased pro-| Thursday. 

tems, the country’s dwindling ‘suction of housing, clothing and| Governor Edge described the ‘of the war. go into the union’s treasury, as a s0-called “health 
’ : 


stocks of soft coal can be stretched 
other goods is needed for veterans, | bac d and ration of the 
pA utmost, officials of CPA lwas given by Get. Omer N. Ene new legislation in New Jersey pro- What you think and do about the coal strike welfare fund.” It would be administered 
“Th thracite strik tice | ey, ore overans| utility plants. se and : 
ae nracite strike no the Affaire Alth ne Penalties are Provided is important. [t is important to you and your entirely by the union. 
week and cupictn elt gear ta a earcanaing| bye eagle ae eee ta tha neat heats of al tedratciea Wd» Two union officials alto have refused to bargain 
ure ” sus n 
procedure in the bitumingus snes stature depsnded upon full produc- opinion and on fei Coal is the most basic of all industries. With- ours o the . ve to 
collecti y anless mine operators agree 


two months ago.” ° 
out it steel cannot be manufactured ... . chet all set om 


Law Requires Strike Notice * “~————~<~S;«7;] 
The War Labor Disputes Act se] LONG BEACH PLEA FAILS | TO HONOR ROOSEVELT Without eteci. eutomnd cae tha al perv and 
- ; oremen pelled rank- ¥ 


quires the filing of a notice with omens 
Goverment agencies when a dis- Most Apartment Owners Refuse American Russian Institute to refrigerators, homes, vacuum cleaners and many union organization. This would make the union's 


te threatens to interrupt produc-| to Gi Up Needed Housi Pp PI Pe 
in tae be oe ae ae eee recent Mlaque to Family other essesttial things people have wanted for so centuah eneiittih aaairdieintaleh ond Uhesbibe 


National Labor Relations Board) Spscial to Tas New Youx Trncas. The American Russian Institute 
poll the workers thirty days after) LONG BEACH, L. I. April 30—\announced yesterday that next long cannot be made... 


waster thay Wank, 00, Soe) ee ethene te alee a cena a nikeos Already, steel and automobile companies are The union officials also have refused to bargain 
‘\voluntary offers of dwellings for , @ jue i 
‘ collectively unless the mine operators agree to 


These ballots are not being taken | ; would be presented to a member of i 

because Congress has refused to| Veterans’ families and those made|i,. ramiiy of the late President closing down... . : . 
The anthracite miners have|ments fire failed tonight when|his® efforts in furthering good 4 eo6 : at wi 

adopted demands similar to those | pledges were made for ony twenty-|American-Russian relations and Electric light and lants reducing their the mines at will. 

of the soft-coal workers = nego | eight of a required 240 units at a/for his war leadership. gas p are recucing 

May 10 a Tech City. Bin OF | meeting here of property owners. lmonean’ yes ty Ae output... 
Mr. Lewis in his letter accom-| State Housing’ Commissioner)» navies former Ambassador t : 

panying the strike notice said: \Herman T. Stichman, who planned|the soviet Union, at a dinner at If coal mining is longer delayed the coal famine jie IMPLICATIONS of these genera! demands are 
“At issue and now in dispute, to requisition vacant apartments|the Hotel Pennsylvania. i i 

among other questions, is bp meant today, had granted a twenty-four; Guests and spathens will include will affect co far reaching. They = affect all business, 

tion of the acceptance and observ- | hour postponement at the request| Andrei A. Gromyko, Soviet del ; in nation. 

ence by the oe State of George A. L. Duffy, realty man|gate to the Unites Nations; Btoyan Such ‘material effects as these of a prolonged _—‘arge and small, in the 

aws pertain chairman owners’ Com-|Gavrilovic, Y strike readil , . ‘ 

compensation and occupational dis-|Inittee, who had offered to pollithe UN: Gennes Code Fenner at coal yas om ; 7 &. If these principles were accepted ft would 

eases and other questions flowing | the owners. Mr. Duffy said tonight! riorida: Dr. Henry E. Sigerist of But there is more at stake in the coal strike hat t ld to f Lon 


therefrom. jhe would notify the Commissioner! Jonngs Hopkins University and Dr. ea 2 . 
“These problems and questions| tomorrow of the results of the poll.| Frank Kingdon, news analyst. The than the continuing supply of these things. without the consent and approval of a union 


ire for their adjustment and It is e ted the State will seize ‘ 
solution the fullest cooperation of|the apartments necessary as origy|*"a"* Wi be am annual one. There is a challenge to our very way of life. overlord. 
aft ‘the pares 8 Caer Spee ny eat Liberty Ship Gets War Honor | sa 
It would wreck American competitive en- 


To this eee 4 —— yee 
, th prom. eir : J 2 
whole-hearted intent. | eS ee Se ee eee OFFICIALS of the miners’ union’ have re- maya 
“No Yardstick of Future” and “just @ matter of time,” fused to bargain collectively with the mine “Pre system. 
‘ 2 _|D. ew Yor ; : 
Nag 5 enter Saeentemed Cc a operators. They have based their refusal on a What you think about these demands is im- 
demand that the operators must first agree in _ portant. Obviously the answer must eventually 


by the past; and all too often = - 
operators of the anthracite c s ° 
_ Speaking to 700 guests at a dinner : a. ‘ ; . : ° : 
sainted m determination to adhere 12 Mis honor in the Concourse Plaza ppines. W. principle to an excise tax to be levied oneveryton be supplied through constructive legislation. 
|Hotel, the Bronx, he asked his or- ; ; . . 
ee oe aoe tincions in Senization to be vigilant to keep of coal mined. Your action could help speed this answer. 
the bituminous coal industry and|°Ut Communists who, he said, were . 
to delay the concluding of a qe ee eee He de- 
uine and full collective bargain-| rans who 
march in today’s May Day parade 


ing contract until the terminal . 
date of the contract has arrived.” \in Gniform be prosecuted. 

A strike of hard coal miners in| 
June would not cause any imme-| 


AkE YOUR SAVINGS 


™ 
diate hardship because anthracite) SLA T T 
is almost exclusively a household Aes ER Y A { ; ° 
fuel. A general pinch probably £ ARN OR. E/ specktlent BF wsaw JOHN D. BATTLE, Executwe Secretary Washington, D. C. 
even with year-round operations, Liteweight 
production hag fallen short of re- 
quirements in the past few years. : 
At the Labor De ent, Edgar : r 


L. Warren, conciliation director, : Write teday for Folder “TA” 
said he had received a letter of [iM SMONGRALM o¢ SLATTERY CYCLE CO. 


resignation from Mr. Fuller and) SMrTrwi ht 228 W. Sind St. HW. Y. 19, HY. 
SHIP ERE! 





had asked him to reconsider. 


ANY WH 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


CTY ACENGES ACT jue NOVEL NOTIN MoD KTS PA LINKS NHOUSE| Vews of Foods ™aavenm 
ON JUVENILE He pb FIRM APTER RECESS mee ca 


Low-Calory Cheese Sticks and Cookies = |_ Three leading Indies of London's 
Old Vic Theatre Company were 


oe oT Secs a Foes and Supporters of Curbs) Fretntul to Those Who Seek to Reduce 
Police, License Board, School et Pap. Report Their Attitudes Backed 


Board Jein in a Drive to | | ean oer by Constituents ‘ By JANE NICKERSON 
ope wom Tf you had to yee em ‘Another point is that, even sented by Miss Gertrude Lawrence. 


urb Delinquency Here / | : By JOHN D. MORRIS spring suit in a size larger though tinned fruits and vegeta-/ 4s shoes with high heels 


Special to Tas New Yorn Tens. Soon aanehie Saumiure Gaaleaseael bies are not likely to be shipped not been made in 


REGULAR PARLEYS LISTEDINA yer see? | Se ge eee en Gee 


Clergy and Welfare Workers 
to Attend Conferences in 
Edch Police Precinct 


bill. sort we've ever sampled, yet they’ 
The Police Department, the Supporters of the curbs report- my y their principal ~ om 
Béard of Education and the De- » ed, however, that they had found ) 


partment of Licenses have joined iw owith’ Also, where ‘polls are suitable, od 
in a concerted drive against juve- tains no eg wt + nn nn aah ~ Sevens Stee be give space ae hem black ame 7 
. root es such as carrots, , 
nile delinquency throughout the : There sppeared ries, or half the quantity furnished! parsni Np 2 poe Lee These ne. epecial clipper, will begin @ six 
city, it was disclosed yesterday. by a tablespoon of Russian dressing.| much the seed- vegeta-| Whom arrived from England by 
The police and education officials - , ' Cookies of four different sorts|bieg in the men-| Special clipper, will begin a sim 
have #greed to hold conferences in - the other product, and though | tioned and, when served with leafy|weeks’ season of repertory on 
h of the eighty-fou li , ere agein you wouldn't select ‘ May 6. 
fae “live borougha. Becta... L@tt: Blocks of light wood alternating with layers of glass may be moved around the shaft to provide | these if you Were ons normal diet, Scenes Tey ine iron commonly ie 


i ‘ - 

secngete ans, Chee different patterned effects. Tan homespun shade. Right: Swimming goldfish provide 2 mobile pattern in t they are far from distasteful.| Now, in to home canning 
: a lamp base of clear glass. Plastic brackets support the tank and lighting fixture. Tan corduroy shade. equipment: @ checked at ran- 

censes, has shifted fiis entire div- Macy’ , dom Lewis & Conger, Hammacher 

sion of inspection into emergency] Both at Macy's. chocolate or hazelnuts or fruits of/gchiemmer, Gimbels, Loeser’s, 

Salen aa rere 2 ~" Modern table lamps incorporat-jsigns of large leaves, flowers orjhousing to make the lamps more position eae cee than age ‘hey “provide ho. more ‘than and find they all have. acca fi ee } 'e 

as ing a variety of materials are|brightly colored parrots. lguitable for home use. Appropri- was rty-two calories apiece. or icular peo 
Precinct meetings of police cap- weakened by the position he took Actually, the manufacturer de- ee Po nae yA oa = pa p 


among the first post-war designs} Lucite brackets support a clear) lighti in modern 
tains and public and parochial/to make their appearance in local|giass tank that forms a base for al"t? ‘°° desk lighting in on OPA. signed both the cheese sticks and/heq at Gimbels and Hearns and Not too sweet 


school principals will be held | stores. modern table piece. The tank may|home interiors are ve pee Traces “Inspiration” the cookies for those—like dia- Not too tart 
monthly with a representative of! Wide bands of cork around an/be used to display brightly tinted|units having curved me “The opposition, such as it is,|Detics, for example—whose food| time canning ' 
the Juvenile Aid Bureau of the Po-|haminem shaft make a light-jcoral, plants, or, if filled with wa-jarms with a tilting device for se- appears to be pretty well inspired|™ust be low in carbohydrate con- Just too good for words! 
lice Department taking a hand in| “elsht table. lamp. Other new/ter, a pair of goldfish. Plastic\curing the light at reading level. by the PAC (CIO Political Action|tent. Hence, the cookies are only 
P m3 metal lamps combine clear plastic/brackets clamp the lighting fix-| Shades of coarse homespun fab- Committee) the League of Women|.90 per cent carbohydrate and the 

the neighborhood inquiries. jrings with brass cylinder bases,|ture in place. iric or metallic paper p minate Votara and’ Chester Bowles,” helsticke .56 per cent. The stores \/ Crosse & Blackwell 
~ Wallander Issues Orders aluminum with bands of dark! Lamps for fluorescent lightingjamong new types shown with con- where you may buy the cookies in- . . 

wood. A series of tall rectangularlaré limited now to desk-type fix-\temporary styled bases. Hand-\@0ded. 1 oot ciusprofit|clude All-Health Food Distributors, ORANGE 
Poise Commissioner Arthur W.|iamp bases made of tin, appropri-|tures of dark metal. In a few\hammered copper sheeting makes and subsidy liquidation amend-|123 East Thirty-fourth Street, and 

Wallander and Dr. John BE. Wade,|ate for porch furniture, are shown|cases small designs have been|unusual shades for simple table ments as “ail important,” he indi-|Abraham & Straus in Brooklyn.| Hopes that this season's produc- PAARMALAERS 

gUperintendent of schools, agreed|in solid colors or with painted de-)painted in the center of the long|lamps. cated that he would press for their Prices range from 43 cents forition of maple syrup would be bet-| 

on such a plan to study the youth ——————————————— retention, in principle at least, re- three ounces to 76 for eight.~ All-iter than limited 1945 output, | 

eas of Senate revisions. Health Food Distributors and Alt-|which was less than a third of 


allander”-sent_ out’ confidential FURNITURE BUYERS |“Theatre de la Mode,’ Paris Couture Show |*"r"wisn the’ Senate could go|man’s carry the cheese sticks forlnormal, were baste bythe bre 


orderg to all commanding officers home, too, and find out how the 


Be. Wote alse nent out" tenouns SCORR ‘BAD MODERN’ In Miniature, Will Open in City Tedayaee 4 3 © ee eS To be sure, warm days are ool 


sa 
tive 


ai 
| 








ae to his eee oe % Minority ee gE gg ag On the Need for Home Canning 
them to ve e ce officials ad foun a 
ered Bh cooperation. By VIRGINIA POPE 7 jthe OPA needed some restric- Fan ne am ‘better at mere | 

In his stepped-up drive against/Store Executives Want Better) anout the busiest place in the,couturiers have put in * these'tions.” stove than hoeing a row, yet wele™ ; 
both juvenile delinquency and leity today is the Whitelaw Reid|clothes?” | Representative Taber, Republi-| \ informed on’ good authority| wae, 02 _1ow that little either of] 
gambling, Mr. Fielding said yes-| Designs and Closer Heed ‘house at 451 Madison Avenue.| Very elegant, and not a bit like can, of New York, asserted: g Y|syrup or sugar is expected in city 


: “ , into anybody who that this is the time when amateur! stores What few products there 
teen served over the week-end on} | t? What Public Desires —|-mnere the “Theatre de Ia Mode,”|h@ Workers on the theatre who go| | “I didn’t run into enybody WN0| ra iors buy seeds and plant voge- t | 


| labout in shirt sleeves, is Jacques was in favor of OPA as is —On | 
pool and billiard parlor operators ——- a jwhich has traveled all the way|worth, of the inne estaltined either side of the fence or in either peohehiy the cans 2S cle i the country or are going to mail- 
for 224 violations of the law. The o ofern® ¢u \from Paris, is being brought to/house of that name, who is here party. People who think rena king on gg A ‘= order customers ¢ 
investigators of the License De- To avoid “bad modern ™ | completion. Today at noon it will/on his first visit to America. ‘OPA is the chief cause of infla- oten ~— — S an this yeas standing. 


ffered in| ‘ ” d inflation 
partment were augmented by a|Nishings that have been o open for a press preview and to-| “A fantastic city,” he says of tion, that it has cause \ 
detail of plain clothesmen assigned|the past, designers and retailérs night a gala reception will take|New York. “You Rowe everything by holding down production. See Dee — — This Is Child Health Day n ATURAL 
by the police commissioner. must work together more closely,| jane at 9 o'clock here.” Representative Cox, Democrat,|## it rela rectly ¢ wor 
° |furnit buyers of local depart-|” © : eee. that the famine, one leading representative) Today being Child Health Day, 

The hearings on the violations/‘urniture buye t| The great brown house is filled) In answer to a remark that it/of Georgia, told the House that the) the food indust ints out that|We pay culinary respect to the! 
will start today in the office of/ment stores declared last night at with the buss of saws and the tap|was wonderful to have Paris come|“misrepresentation of the ye pares like wh . ind ri . in| young fry with this recipe for a| 
Mr. Fielding, 137 Centre Street,/® dinner meeting of the New York | tap of hammers. Through the|to New York in the form of the. and motives of the House” by| staples, like wheat and rice, are in alty 


7 “ ater need overseas than com- d — with| 
and continue tomorrow and Fri-|Chapter of the American Design-|).jiwavs and up the stairs are car-|"Theatre de la Mode, bringing Stabilization Director Bowles onel meeeiee preserved fruits and veg: |them in mind. The family should 


day. The summonses were served/ers Institute held at the 400 Res- ried the wire manikins, two feet'with it so many distinguished Price Administrator Porter had) 
on operators for permitting minors/taurant, 521 Fifth Avenue, high, clad in clothes made by the| members of the poe lle he replied, “added nothing to their reputation pee es Ege Agee ——e con- it, too. 
to frequent or work in the pool} An alert designer is greatly greatest houses of the French cou-| “Yes, but we have come merely to for veracity.” = ra — . high in wa — PRUNE FRAPPE (T-T)* 
and billiard parlors; for failure to/needed to plan low price furniture... ‘The hallways are being|get you back to France.” One would think the House ned tone or this emp *|2/3 cup evaporated milk 
post signs barring minors, employ-|Mra. Catherine Foster, buyer of/4,.504 in golden yellow velvet to, Eijane Bonabel is responsible for\“stabbed them through their) b wd rome Ng tony” shipped) "3 tablespoons lemon juice 
ing unlicensed attendants, and/modern furniture for McCreery’s, |... 4 uniformity of background|the ort l sketches of the mani-|hearts” when “as a matter of fact/abroad and that, after the advent 

. give y gro e original sketches e th it has|next fall of the new pack, it and| 1 cup stewed prunes, sieved, 
having unranitary premises. said, adding: to the mise en scéne. kins. Dressed in a red sweater and|it has done no such thing, it fresh produce, too will’ be 20 ample| mashed or cut fine 


“It does not mean that simply lsimply stepped on their toes.’ 
Monthly Repo. Planned because the furniture is be aeeey ehabiiaaeat eat tein ae ony en cajuste dolls’ beads Speaker Rayburn took a calm/|in supply that there will be no|1/3 cup sugar. 


rs of Board of Educa-| made to sell at a low price it m groun pées wigs view of the situation, saying that|call for extra quantities of home-| Pour milk into refrigerator tray 
Rogge pose soba work-| be tricked up or, what is worse, Seon Bt. Aaartin ¢eobtoned thee’ frag- aaa enn tn tale tg “3 the House bill was not as bad as|canned products. and chill until ice crystals — 
ers and police detectives will be|turned out without any attention /ii, wire bodies of the models that) Guillaume, the coiffeur recently| some people thought. Some of his} We are inclined to agree with|around the edges. Whip milk stiff! 
invited to the police precinct con-/to its function or the necessity of | will display the elegance of the|arrived from Paris to see to it that constituents were disturbed at first,|him on this score, but, as he says/in chilled bowl with chilled beater.| 
ferences so that all angles of| making it a 7 ~ “y ne|Paris couture. From one floor to|the hair arrangements of the man- he reported, but he ennene a ce are ee Add a Sg and whip until! @ 
juvenile delinquency can be heard) Furniture ad ° f att a eviee another moves Boris Kochno, the|ikins are correct, works on smartly|calm their fears that seg eee om, Gee te B wag i wh nnee = hes been adhed Pile lightly | 
by the commanding officers.|explained, is only a slightly re |well-known choreographer and'coiffed heads, a bare two inches had been scuttled by the oy pam ah pure > 2 eg hen A dishes and chill about! 
Monthly reports will be forwarded/version of the seven-piece bedroom | former associate of Diaghileff, ar-|high, waiting to be placed on wire) Majority Leader McCormack de- ‘ 4 win Bey Armen Ao ro th eee Top with! 
to Mr. egos nag ne Wels, | [ey Vaaes ee es “out. (ranging the figurines, adjusting shoulders and under hats created clared i he ir over’ thal methine Eee a A rn ag at “Ts peng _ — e| 
It was explaine at peren ~|arms and bodies so as to give the by milliners whose names are ple to n “rev , arden furn chilled custard serv : 
would be. —e - Rye eg Seed agen Be yy low little creatures the appearance of|known on both sides of the At- a sos rie ae yt both oe ote aa my ined Beautiful 
ouse when It is found that eitner! jmotion. Mr. Kochno is in charge lantic. ey were “dist , afte -T)— =| 
the mother or father was indirectly|income brackets poh poe = the lighting and staging. g | Perhaps no scene was more in-|and “incensed.” te it comes — = you eg { has been tried in THE — 
responsible for the youngster fatl- As an example rd er ~ oe Christian Berard seems to be|triguing than that which revealed) Representative Patman, Demo- 0 aeaie the 7 @ the Tem ORK TIMES kitchen. 
-~ ta, reais cheek tocar 1927 ii i Sullivan, head of |¢VeTyWhere. Now one sees him in/Mme, Bruyére, whose designs are|crat, wea pagecematea.: nessee railroad clerk whe on ene Questions concerning rationing 
boodlums, or being mischievous in|the drapery, curtain and — wy eye they gos aged Rag ny Ae yon fparkman, ma-\acre produced enough vegetables|and other food grotieme mee be| BLL ade fr om 
his own neighborhood. According)stery department of Abraham &| 11174 ¢ioor, where the most extrav-|the dresses that are her contribu-| jority whip, asserted: last year to preserve 690 jars for| submitted by telephone, -6324, ; 
to the penal code, te ee be|Straus, cited a — ~ a Ay famous) scant of all the sets are being/tion to the theatre. She patted; “The people of this country have|the winter and whose grocery bills|ercept Saturdays and Sundays, or| professionally cut 
charged With mists or foridesigner that is eu to st the punt. and caressed them. “J'adore teal got it in for the House for emas-|are reported to average only $16|by writing to the Food Newe Bdi- 


failing to watch diligently over the|pack perfectly. a “This,” he says, “we planned to|poupées,” she said. culating price control. I don’t think| monthly.) tor, THE New York TIMES, ; : 
Re eS ee | aa rey oe true. ene break ott make @ scene from Versailles, but| This is “her first visit to the there is any question about it.” | = = PAY T £ R i 5 
Two station house conferences/gaid, “but thew egs |that has changed now. After all, United States. She confessed a Representative Priest, ven ban NEW AIR SRRVICES eneupeny enneuneeé cleo the re-| id ®t ,! 


have been held. One meeting, at-'go fast I don’t think you'd ever): ad “ : ' ot T ia Gad oven tant 
. thy | i * y Mendel has done Versailles to liking for New York; the sky- of Tennessee, sa be 
tended by twenty-five persons, W&S be able to prove it. perfection! These three sets are scrapers did not astonish her be- ers and busines men with whom opening today of its services to 


neld Monday afternoon at the; willis C. Carling, manager of to represent a fantasy, mysterious, cause she had seen so many of he had talked believed “almost BEGIN HERE TODA northern Michigan from Detroit,/ HARRIET PEPIN 





are are being sold at the source in 


long years’ 











S0CO2CCaA See 


dresses are ~ 





Fifth Avenue station house inithe furniture division of W. & J. : ; . > eption” that the Hou ’ 4) be de| 
. ; and dreamy. There's something of|them in pictures and movies, She without exception a e House} lwhere connections w made} 
South Brooklyn. Another was held/gioane, made a plea to designers | rrealism about them. What life'finds the city stimulating and had gone too far in amending the) for Cheboygan, Petoskey and Har-| 


yesterday at the Union Avenue |«,evernever—to design _some- ’ i Y women bill. | 
station in the Red Hook section of thing just to have something yay pd poo geen mange et te ne ig New York bor Springs. 


Brooklyn. —something different.” A design, | eee es | Taft Asks OPA “Freeing” List [American and Northeast Lines; ™* ‘ist. direct United States 

Crimes in Youth Category _ [he said, should improve something WASHINGTON, April 30 U>— ~". |service to Madrid will be begun 

Police officials seemed well satis- that now — one Ny oo New Sugar Stamp Valid Leasure Heads Pau! Smiths Senator Taft, Republican, of Ohio, Schedule 65 and 60-Minute wm ape tenn 0 er aang 
a creation, m Spare stamp No. 49 in the family) MALONF, N. Y., April 30 UP—| suggested today that the OPA sub- Flights to Boston pone ah vin — ihe — p TTERN 


d with the initial ste taken 
seg cu Gunaaienaeiia i. dcating — oF a Givision merchan-|f&tion book is valid as of today|mrederick G. Leasure, who for five|mit its own list of items which|, The service will continue to Rome 
with the problem. One high police/ ais. manager of Bloomingdale's, |*°T the Farcinne “4 ee years hag been engaged in survey|could be removed from price oon and Cairo. ‘The company has asked| 
official said the concentrated Grive| sisted how his store had enlisted |"“S*" P + work for the Near East Founda-|‘To! as specified production leve Five new air services will begin|the CAB for service from Chicago 


‘! grocer who will cash it in for are reached rou 
had been undertaken when & SUT~|the help of the Museum of Modern hn been an ched. if La Guardia Field today.on this te. 
\the scarce commodity. The stamp/tion of New York, has *P") Saul Sells, representing the OPA|‘TO™ — 7s y 
vey disclosed that a majority of| art before the war to reach neW will remain negotiable through|pointed president of Paul Smiths pefore the menate askin and Spectacular rivalry is in sight be- Se of TACA's 


the crimes by youths in the last designers arranged for manufac-| , | 
. : ug. 31, Spare stamp No. 9 also/College of Arts and Sciences which Currency Committee, said that theltween American Airlines and 
bape oe ans te ond 9 ramon wey pecan gm os “introduetion| Sue for —_ = Rye will reopen this _ It was used ides seemed “worth exploring.” — |Northeast Airlines, which have! sarge Fay eee agg at ee told — em 1 nore 
) or home-canning throug ict. for military training purposes a The committee, considering legis-| scheduled flights to Boston in 1|bassador at Washington, who said:! © “Jem <7 W orid- Telegram 

F 


and not by war veterans as hadity the public. He noted that when) i+), tp | 
been reported frequently. lconsumers were “exposed” to t e\wit ~ eetee So ere a ing the war. lation to extend the life of the)... 5 minutes and 1 hour, respec-| “This will relieve a tight trans-| town wraps to Baby hoods * 

It is planned to have lists made| new expression in modern furni- Pn ee, ee ————————|OPA, received today from the jportation situation and provide) inneapohs Siar Journal 
in each precinct of the youthful/ture they liked it and bought it. Cotten Manufacturers Associa-|tively. much needed facilities for tourist @°s1!", ever 1000 drawings end diagrams, 6 
offenders and policemen will be Nita Hawg furniture stylist and tion a plea that cotton goods be| TACA (Transport Aereos Centro| and commercial travelers between p Sietemaie 
coer curvellienss, "Rommel acne aaa ' i EOE cour to production. ‘would rememe Ita hong’ suspended] een at he United Staten.” 
under surveillance. ou Newark, acknow a be ae sso . —- ee 
newsboys who ride the subwa@y|transitional period,” no matter a nad ree bh ’ From the Amalgamated Cloth-\service between Guatemala and May Is Child Health Month | 


te at night will find them-| rilliant a designer might be, < : . |ing Workers, CIO, it received a|/Miami on Friday. | oeeee I ¥ 
ee a * trouble within the natin coun ao have Sis bee 4 exe- i PP haetrry teed lea for a year’s extension of “ef-| Other new servicks were ah-| Acting Mayor Vincent R. Impel-| LADIES 


ort- ective price control.” Sidney|nounced for Albany, Cleveland, |litteri yesterday proclaimed today 2 Unsightty hair from tes, bern 
x ‘c aeaine sent out by Ra peng Yaseen we Hillman, Pread of the union, tele-|/Madrid, Seattle and Northwest./as child health day and May as removed permanently 
Wade to the various school offi- ———————_— ‘ graphed that organized labor “de-| The New York-Boston airway|child health month. He urged all by ELECTROLYSIS SPEGIALIST 
cials, he said: —a fF mands it.” |becomes far and away the world’s New Yorkers to take part in the ‘jie Gara 
“I am confident these meetings; BROOKLYN TO BEGIN amg Batak The National Apartment Owners |busiest with the addition of the various activities planned during ee 
will be another step in the direc-| ODAY ' Association urged that rent ceil-\new fast schedules, American Air-\the month to improve the health 3 MISS BEATRICE [L" fif "si; 
tion of greater cooperation — FUND APPEAL T D re é ‘ings be increased 15 per cent as|lines will provide four round-trip and welfare of children. 





one way to defeat the housing|flights a day in four-engined, fifty- 


i of | ¥ é f shortage. passenger -4s. This is in addi- 
ninth annual campaign Oe The American Hotel Association|tion to the twenty-seven round 


| The : 
Fund will) ; 
TO PLAN WAR MEMORIALS peepee os ry Ms with al» pea Meee «=| asked that room rates be increased |trips the line already operates with) 
noon-hour” ceremony at sf ; 10 per cent “to remove the imme-|twenty-one to 28-passenger DC-8s. 


Committee to Make Suggestions! : ‘Lys: al diate threat of loss operations|The trips will leave New York at 

Hall d dinner tonight in the : er ) S ope ns e trips eave 
for School Projects Towers Hotel, 35 Clark Street,| (ee pop iadie We ‘ which we face daily. 10 and 11 A. M. and 2 and 5 P. M., CLEANS 
a ae ;' which 600 business leaders are ex-| [7% E *) mgr ey Qe SE returning from Boston at noon, 1, 
Ideas for war memorials that é s ge Girls Athletic League Meets (3:35 and 7 P. M. 

pected to attend. P 4 | if C | 3 N S 

may cost $50 to $50,000 will be!” At the Borough Hall rally Philip; (3 meat Sy , The greatest obstacle to the ex-| Northeast Airlines, the 

developed by an advisory commit-|A. Benson, president of the Dime/ @ “4 +e tension of the program of the Girls’ |of which by Pennsylvania Central 


k of Brooklyn and PPM Se | e) Branch, Public School Athletic! Airlines is now being heard before | , , 
tee to the Board of Education, oes oagnien aon a pre-| a ee Woe ‘ League, is the shortage of volun-|the Civil Aeronautics Board, fol- When it's time to clean the kitchen, 


was announced yesterday. . seit :.. teer teachers, according to the|lowed American's announcement , 
oo peer oe — President fp BJ The de oh] ; 4s a — read yesterday at/with a promise of three round trips shad _ eat — oes aa os 

was heid yesterday f lner meeting will be addressed by| # Fey ortieth annual meeting in the|a day between here and Boston,’ eans your floor quick os a 

wom gg tose Bae ~ os a a Arthur A. Eall:ntine, president of] Beat “sey _— yng my nS fiat hour's tae. They wink, 

ae hot. ; N. Baxter Jackson, 2 5 A here . M., noon Yj 

Anthony Campagna, Bronx mem- why bn = rer tater te y pa ¥ Street and Lexington Avenue. Dr.|\4 P. M., returning at 10 A. M., 2 M Cabinets, teo, end steve end 

ber of the board and chairman of ti mr. Mary Ellen Meade, principal of and 6 P. M. Sixty-passenger DC-4! 

its committee on buildings and Reagan (Tex) McCrary, executive ae 4 Washington Irving High School, line al-| , sink! . j 

“ Tavior, di-|®ditor of The American Mercury.) @% bes) Ss bene gy J & r planes will be used. The | a 

sites. Francis ome: hy, , At fund headquarters, 11 West) 7] i ee tty b' &/ready operates sixteen flights with 

rector of the Metropolitan Museum Forty-"econd Street, it was an-| 5 ac a -~ _ a 2 oles- | DC-3s. AAD | 

of Art, was elected chairman. "| nounced that the shipping industry) im F |cent girls. Groups of students per-| Ceremonies will be held in Al- ; y) wa Wwiu i, 
The advisory group will present! .¢ the Port of New York has ac-| = _. |formed folk dances. bany as that city again becomes: WSS Yy ~ 

the ideas for memorials to schools cepted a quota of $65,000 in the| 7) BA. Gicenen: Sichanienne Gileded a stop on American's -Cleve-| ZL ———— SS 

and parent-teachers associations.|¢5 999, 4) drive and that a com- by a land rum, with one stop each way Z 

The members include Mrs. Laurent! mittee of twenty-six leaders in the ‘¢ pen penne. who can op.|® day. Service will be increased 

Oppenheim, first vice president of siipping industry has been formed. | ‘§ erate sewing machines are n later in the summer, when the 

the School rt League; Donald De One-minute “spot” radio an- wil ‘ ‘ to help finish 15,000 garments for company will provide a New York- 


epg —‘s = _ 
Lue, president of the National) nouncements urging support of the) ‘ee '— — - |European children pledged by the| Albany service. American has not tant) 
Sculpture Society, and Dr. Elias| pond hove been seeeeee by stage PMP New York Chapter, American Red/ stopped in Albany since the start! a i y = 
285 — 


community agencies.” 


\ 
V 


Wr 
iF) 


Lieberman, Associate Superinten-|and screen performers for use dur- Baers FNS 4 Cross, Mrs. E. Roland Harriman,|of the war. | 
dent of Schools. Eric Kebbon, ar-ling , the drive, Mr. Jackson dis- aed 2 administrator of volunteer service} The new Cleveland service will 


chitect for the board, was repre-|closed. The recordings are a 


for the chapter, said yesterday.| also be in DC-4s operated by nal a” y ow ase gix , 
Vd ee 


Inspired by a combing jacket of 1900, Frances Sider designed g She asked that residents of Man-|sylvania Central. The new flight! —— 
“ hi , |hattan apply at the main produc-/wil lleave La Guardia Field at 
is to be elected at the next ineet-| The Queens campaign will start| beach coat of bright navy rayen faille trimmed with white braid. It/tion workroom, 401 Fifth Avenue,|11:50 A. M., arriving at Cleveland THE ALL-PURPOSE, GENTLE GREASE-CISECAVIN® CLEANER 


ing in Mr. Campagna’s office at|tomorrow and that of the Bronx’ covers a two-piece suit of white faille edged with blue braid. Available/and residents of the Bronx at 310/at 2:49 P. M. Return service will , THAT REMOVES DIRT AND SOFTENS WATER 
3 P. M. on May 15. ‘on Friday. some time this month at Saks-Fifth Avenue. Kingsbridge Road. leave Cleveland at 8:23 P. M. This) 


sented yesterday by his deputy,|distributed te metropolitan sta- 
Gerald Holmes. Another member) tions, he «aid. 


‘ 4 





NUPTIALS ARE HELD 


FOR MISS STAFFORD 


She Is Married in Church of 
St. Ignatius Loyola to Walter 
Elliott Travers Jr. 


Miss Eileen Stafford, daughter 
of Mrs. William Francis Stafford 
of 45 Kast Eighty-fifth Street and 
the late Mr. Stafford, was married 
here to Walter Elliott Travers Jr., 
son of Mr. and Mrs. Travers of 23 
East Eighty-third Street and East 
View, N. Y., yesterday afternoon 
in the Roman Catholic Church of 


BRIDAL COUPLE AND AN ENGAGED GIRL 


HELENE LEDERMAN | 


MARRIED YESTERDAY 


BECOMES A BRIDE 


San Francisco Girl Wed Here, 


to Clarence Buttenwieser, a 
Stock Exchange Member 


Miss Helene Lederman, daughter 
of Dr. and Mrs. Edward D. Leder- 
man of San Francisco, was mar- 
ried to Clarence Buttenwieser o 
New York, son of the late Mr. and 
Mrs. Joseph L. Buttenwieser of 
this city, here yesterday after- 
noon at the home of the bride- 
groom's brother and sister-in-law, 
Mr. and Mrs. Benjamin J. Butten- 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, —_—_—_—_— MAY 1, 1946. 


JEANNE H. CURTIS 
ENGAGED TO WE 


Red Cross Aide Bride-Elect of| 
Lieut. Edward B. Whitesell, 
Army Medical Corps 


Special to Tus New Yorn Times 

SUMMIT, N. J., April 30-——The 
engagement has been announced 
of Miss Jeanne Hathaway Curtis, 
daughter of Mr. and Mra. John 
Morrison Curtis of this city, to 
First Lieut. Edward Bruce White- 
sell, AUS Medical Corps, son of 
Mr. and Mrs. Clarence J. White- 
sell of East Orange. The wedding 
will take place May 11 at the home 
in Cincinnati of Mr. and Mrs. 


AMUSEMEN ij o 


OPERA SEEKS $150,000 


Philadelphia La Scala Aiming to 
Widen Scope, Add Programs 


special to Tus New Yoru Times 


PHILADELPHIA, April 30. The 
La Scala Opera Company of Phila 
delphia will conduct a civic arts 
campaign to solicit $150,000 with 
which to widen its scope and na- 
tional importance, Mrs. H. Birchard 
Taylor, wife of the president of the 
company, announced today 

The campaign, the first appeal 
for funds ever made by La Scala, 


L 31 


will be opened on May 1 under the 
direction of Mrs. Taylor. “We are 
seeking funds,” she said, “to en- 
able Philadelphia La Scala to pre 
sent a more extensive program of 
operas in the 1946-47 season and 
to make it the outstanding opera 
company of the country 


Joan Fontaine Will Be Wed 

HOLLYWOOD, Calif., April o¢ 
(‘Joan Fontaine, film actress, 
said today she and William Dozier, 
RKO stuglio production executive, 
would be married soon. Mr. Dozier 
was divorced last week in Las Ve- 


gas, Nev 


“SEATS ON SALE TOMORROW 


Good locations available all performances 


| | NOTE: Extra Mat. THURS. MAY 9 Stir cco | 


THEATRE INCORPORATED presents 
THE HENRY IV Part I 


OLD VIC KASS 


UNCLE VANYA 
THEATRE COMPANY 


wieser, 17 East Seventy-third 
Street. The ceremony was per-| 
formed by the Rev. Dr. Nathan A. 
Perilman. 

Escorted by her father, the bride 
wore a gown of plush-pink satin, 
made with a fitted bodice, long 
sleeves and a ful! skirt that termi- 
nated in a train. Her veil of tulle 
was embellished with heirloom 

_}rose point lace and attached to a 
headdress of satin. She carried) 
lilies of the valley. The Misses) 
Carol Buttenwieser and Carol Ann 
Prins, niece of the bridegroom,| 
were bridesmakis. Peter and Paul 


eo ee. oo Aree HOWLAND WINS 


bridegroom, were pages. APPROV F SONGS| 
fa After a motor trip in Canada\. AL FOR 

Mr. Buttenwieser and his bride will of this community of the engage- 
MISS ANGELA PLACE llive at 910 Park Avenue. Alice Howland, mezzo-soprano,| ment of their daughter, Lois Ann, 


WILL BE WED JUNE 15) Mm A. pK Lym who has been heard here with the|t® Midshipman William Howard 
San Francisco, attended the Uni-- New York City Center Opera Com-| Miynn Jr. USN, son of = and 
Miss Angela Place,| versity of California and studied P@my and has sung also with the an Rts ae Se tes 
daughter of Mr. and Mrs, Her.|broad. She is a granddaughter of|Philadelphia Opera Company, gave] |W, DUT 8 0Ck 18 Sl ae Her 
mann Gauntlet Place of 530 Park(|the late Mr. and Mra, Isaac Liebes|® Tecital of songs last night at) it) oo) Oe oe a a the 
San Francisco. Mr. Butten-|Times Hall. She won a deserved) /\ence ls a second Classman at the 

Avenue and Millbrook, N. Y., has) ieser was graduated from Dart-\#uccess with the large audience, | United States Naval Academy. 

chosen June 15 for her marriage|mouth College and the College of both for the excellence of her sing- ye 

to Lieut. Cochran Bryant Supplee,| Physicians and Surgeons of Colum-|!"& ®nd for the charm of her per- | DEEP are the 
AUS, son of Mr. and Mrs. Cochran|bia University. He recently re-|Sality. ee 
mind with the 
lightning of its 
drama. Go see it!" 


antvet an honorable d Miss Howland revealed a voice| 
Supple of this city. The ceremony . > Comer oof rich and lovely quality, power) 
— WALTER WIMGHELL 
7 
the sesteRuN 
pra 


Henry E. Perry. 

Miss Curtis was graduated in 
1942 from Swarthmore College and 
is stationed at Camp Atterbury, 
Ind., with the American Red Cross, 
Her fiancé, an alumnus of Prince- 
ton University, served his interne- 
ship at Bellevue Hospital in New 
York after graduating from the 
College of Physicians and Sur- 
geons of Columbia University in 
1944 He also is stationed at 
Camp Atterbury. 


St. Ignatius Loyola. The ceremony 
was performed by the Rev. John 
Edwards Grattan, rector of the 
church, in the presence of members 
of the immediate families. The 
bridegroom received an honorable 
discharge recently from the Army 
after two years’ service in the 
China-Burma-India Theatre. 

The bride wore an afternoon 
costume of aquamarine - colored 
crepe, made with a fitted bddice, 
short sleeves and a fuli skirt, a! 
headdress of white tulle and car-| 
ried white orchids. Her only at- 
tendant was her sister, Mrs. Paul " 

A. Corroon, who was attired in Mr. and Mrs. Walter Elliott Travers Jr. 

pale-blue crepe, a headdress to cor- she How York Tiss Studio 
respond and carried purple orchids. a ts 
Dr. Samuel B. Moore, brother-in- 
law of the bridegroom, was best 
man. 

A smal! reception for members 
of the immediate families was 
given at Sherry’'s 

After a wedding trip in Sea Is- 
land, Ga., Mr. Travers and his 
bride will make their home in this 
city. 

The bride attended the 
Heart Convent and Marymount 
Academy. Mr. Travers attended 
the Hun School in Princeton, N. J. 
He is @ grandson of the late James 
Butler, founder of the Butler 
Stores and the Empire City Race 
Track, of which the bridegroom is 
now secretary- ~treasurer. 


Schoenfield—Bookman 

The marriage of Miss Edith Carol 
Bookman, daughter of Dr. and Mrs. 
Samuel Bookman of 21 East 
Eighty-seventh Street, ‘to Albert 
Schoenfield, son of Mr. and Mrs. 
Louis Schoenfield, also of this city, 
took place yesterday afternoon at 
the home of her parents. The Rev. 
Dr. Nathan A. Perilman performed 
the ceremony. Edwin Loewy, 


OEDIPUS with 
THE CRITIC 


CENTURY THEATRE, 59th St. & 7th Ave. 


Opening Nights (8 P.M.) $2.40-12.00. Other Eves. (8:15 P.M.) $1.80-6.00 
_Matinees Wed. & Sat. (2 15 P M ) ul 80-4.20. Tox Included. — 


Mrs. Clarence Buttenwieser 
Tra L. Hi 


Vanderford—Flynn 

Special to Tus New Youn Times 
MILLBURN, N. J., April 30— 
Announcement has been made by 
Mr. and Mrs. H. Leroy Vanderford 


9 ARE YOU 
WITH IT? 


wow as SHUBERT THEATRE 


44h Street West of Broadway, Ci 6-5090 


MATS. TODAY, TOM’W & SAT. | 
Quod Sests for Al Performances at Bex Office 





Sacred 


will be performed in St. Peter's ® captain in the Army's Medical 4 wide 
range, which was well 
Episcipal Church in Millbrook, and Administrative Corps, after three & 


and a half yea { lused, with excellent production, 
& reception will be given at Rose) months of Pew Ses spout tm the true intonation and fine enuncia- 
Lawn, home of the bride's parents| Pacific Theatre. Mr. Buttenwieser tion. This vocal equipment was 
in Milibrook. is a member of the New York Put at the service of real musician. 

Miss Place will have her sister-| Stock Exchange. iship and unusually intelligent and| 
in-law, Mrs. John Bassett Moore . effective interpretations. 


Place, as matron of honor and her The singer's general style was, 
cousin, Miss Catharine Adams of BARBARA WALSH ENGAGED perhaps, better adapted to the Ger- 


Albany, as maid of honor. The |man numbers by Mozart, Mendels- 
Misses Georgiana Maclay and Ele-|Ex-Senator’s Daughter Fiancee sohn, Brahms and Richard Strauss) 


anor Travers will be bridesmaids.| of Li than to the modern French and 
Myrlin McCullar will be best man Lteut. Millard Carnriok Jr. American songs, for it had warmth 
for the bridegroom-elect, whose Special to Tax New Youx Tocns, and fine lyric feeling, nice mold- 
ushers will include Sgt. John Bas-| SOUTH ORANGE, N. J., April/!"® Of phrase and admirable dy- 
sett Moore Place, AUS, brother of |30—Announcement has been made|"®™ic shadings and contrast. Nev- 


brother-in-law of the bridegroom. the bride; Frederick Carr White|by former United Stat ertheless, she sang Tremisot's "No- 
Announcement has been made and Stephen Finch. ‘Aether Walsh and Mrs. Walsh of! vembre” with the elegance and re- 


was best man. h b 
The bride was graduated from oneal y Gelaibooe ti'C. —— _ this community of the engagement | serve it demands, and Duparc’s| seerpqpoiiy, 
Php ee omy Renee —— engagement and forthcoming mar- Oatman—Spencer = their daughter, Barbara Louise, Lo a Cag ayo sen 
her husband studied at thy Scheotli ne Of, ner daughter, Annie Lee,| | Mr. and Mrs. Atwood B. Oat- eam ttt Gene tee ho ‘although the Air de Lia from De- 
udson nd Jr., son o r.j}man of 430 East Fifty-sevent “ 
New York. The couple will live inland Mrs. Rand of this city. The|Street have caunmbend tee an _ ~ed Comte of Mont- pena o tittle too fend. The 
pe planned for June 1 in — y Na daughter, Mary . Mies Walsh, an alumna of Miss ean group was well projected, 
rock, to ymond Henry Spen- , pose 
MRS. HAWKES is MARRIED Miss Bynum attended Salem|cer, son of the late Mr. and Mrs, we gees rang Geen a aly egy | ela om Jolo 
College in Winston-Salem, N. C.|Bertrend E. Spencer of Middle- ant pas Med a oo s\and Paul Creston—bowed from 
Former Jane White Bride Here®"* '* studying voice here. The/ town, Conn. le “ nded 
ee prospective bridegroom, an alum-| Miss Oatma ttended the Lawrenceville Scheel, attendea|et seete af fhe comiively 
of Alistair Cooke of BBC nus of Bard College, was appointed| Vaughan School, Bloomfield Hills,|/DUX®, University and was gradu-/numbers by each, respectively. 
Mrs. Jane White Hawkes, daugh- od penne Fo ryt sd ~ ada eee "un Boon - ae of Medicine. eh ee i lane. Encores, beginning with te 
iw org noe an — of ton, in 1941 and presently is con-| attended the yeah sor may Se a a me 
wwnite a pac es ea be oe “s ductor of the People’s Civic/tute of Technology, is a senior at yr 
ee pede na Fr me ya ha Chorus in Jersey City and also is|Cornell: He was with the Marine 
a Joh rX —d Ae b= director of music in the historic)Corps during the war. 
y by John A. Byrnes, Chief Jus-!oi4 Bergen Church of that city. 
“tice of the City Court, in his cham- Phillips—Frieder 


bers. 
The bride is the widow of Maj. Mr. and Mrs. Harry Phillips Jr. 
Albert Whitfield Hawkes, AUS, ZONA HORN WED IN JERSEY of 124 East Seventy-second Street} ROSELLE PARK, N. J., April| Franklin D. Roosevelt, chairman 
have made known the engagement|30—Mr. and Mrs. J. Stevens Liv- of the special performance, will 


Besed on the 
ee 


fdrant GS eg 


Miss Annie Lee Bynum 
James Abresech 


FULTON W. 46 St. Eves. #40. MAT. TORY 


METROPOLIT nouse ™ LAST 11 1 DAYS 


WALTER CONGSFORD + WY SCOTT + HORSTEN KENTON 
2S ARTISTS OF THE BALLET RUSSE OF MONTE CARLO 


RUSSIAN 
‘BALLET 


So lO te He 


stan 3 tax) AY ALL PORPS. 


MISS LIVINGSTON TO WED followed the printed liat. 


Roselle Park Girl Girl will icemn Show to Aid Boys’ “School 


A benefit pefformance for the| 2600 
Bride of Henry G. Elwell Jr. |Wiltwyck School for Boys will be 
Te ven on May 21 at the National 

Special to Tus New Yoru Tuas. 


re by “Call Me Mister.” Mrs. 


MATINEE TODAY at 2:40 


PAULA STONE & HUNT STROMBERG 


victor HERBERT'S 


“A HIT COMEDY 1"? —cotemen, Mirror 
OSCAR KARLWEIS + BERT LYTELL 


ILIKE IT HERE’ 
GOLDEN Theatre | MAT. TODAY };° ' LAST 6 TIMES 


a atiaa i MATINEE TODAY at 2:30 he 


MARR 
, a Lg A., 43 WH. Enat “8 8B om yh = BONTERPS a. A p — 1 cvulies 
Ry y son, om ne ” ». wn Beestet 


nee: 
"hace ives. 840. MATINEES Tom’ wa GA 
me PSTN TINEE TODAY] savas 


the age bang!" —Coteman, Birrer 
te 


cM ouas wR unos: m PEAR PA'bEY 
MATS Ts) TopaY a sat. at he 





wt By 24 The 


fOWInN LESTER prescats The 


OF NORW vA 


APES vu THEA. 8 %. Clr.7 
Sharp. BAT. Seat & sat. 


OURDON, Cond. Ame.  sOReHOU + fhe i a 
Seb ETH, MERKEN Dus nd Vern the | MATINEE, TODAY, 2.20, Sin 
ong i GET YOUR GUN|~ maTiNEE TODAY |S OnT 
q it 4 othe al es MATINEE TODAY H 0" W V ents OA fy 
Aa ene ie ] “ty HERBERT & & D SOROTHY TY FIELDS D Dee Maint =e at A a » 
Osa ht .- Peal _ ow RAY MIDDLETON. crtetl Garey yy ~ tee 0358 a Mats. Tom vk £50 shears 
Deors == ° meinen te +30 PERFORMANCES! |: bee a bat. 2.3548 ts sata at 
yee aT. wt 230 
—— aon 


KATHARINE ceonic 


CORN HARON 
TA Onn me is 


presents 


MATINEE 1 TODAY 
NIESEN 


CANDIDA **t.% * ™ GERTRUDE. NUESEN 
Ser nad Foon Le ce at 
Vales t IUSTON 


APPLE, OF HIS EYE 
NOW at NAW o> aHURERT THEATRE. W_ sib. 


Mats. TODAY, Tom’ w & Sai. :"% 


ARE YOU" WiTH TT? | MaTiN 


ROBERTS pown PARKE GRAY 
Kath LEE jane CULO june RICHMOND 
Seats all Perf'ces at bor office 


MATINEE, TC TODA AY at at 2:30 


EVES. PROMPTLY AT 6:35. MATS. 
RALPH BUTA 


HUSSEY in 
STATE. OF THE UNION 


bry Pye ry — Al Nerman — Tihmar weds Otnere 
BROADKYU Thea. 44tn W of B way Cir 6-06e8 ut Se Akin a rt b's “a s 
MATINEE TODAY ot he o 


Dao! rent 
Kve.8 35, $1.20- $4 80 Tax inet Sat Today & bat. 3 38 
A PEMBERTON presents | EEE 
F NK A prem a aware 


ie Pulitzer Prize oa | 
ml AR VE Y sesconiwe wucr | A flat 


Sr many CHASE 
Directed by ANTOINETTE PERRY | EDDIE DOWLING & Leute a INGER precast 


ath Bt. Thea. Thea « of B ay oday 2:40 | LAURETTE 4 
and DOWLING ia 


ODAY 42am «22 |, TAYLOR 
MATINEE TODAY ‘ee. ic rte GEASS MENAGERIE 
Oscar KARLWEIS Bert LYTELL | mansae‘tsc any tn tse tom's Stee 
20) ] LHRE LT HERE MATINEE TODAY ‘teu 2 dat 


Times 
“ "The ee Mey y Bm TS, be . 


OPEXRING PERFORMANCE 


TONIGHT at 8:20—AIDA/ 
Qiewert, Clade, Themes, Gareey. Wi ldermee 
Thurs. ie GUTTERFLY. Pri. Bee... 7) 
CA TWAVIATA. Nei. Mat CARMEN, Sei. Bee 

iL TROVATORE. Sun Mat RIGOLETTO. Bun 
Eve. LA BOHEME. ORCH. $2.40, $1.80. LOGES, 
$2.40, $1.60. MEZZ..$1 50. BALC.$1.20( ime. tax) 


CENTER THEATRE "er*sietler, Center F 


40th St. & Oth Ave. 


ves. 3.40. Mat 


GOLDEN Thee. 45 W ot Bway. € Ct. 6.6700 


borg moe —— in 1843) Radcliffe Alumna Is Married to 
w serving with the Ninth Gen- of their, daughter, Mary Ann, to|ingston of this place, 
eral Hospital unit. She studied art} Alvin Rumi, Economist's Son | Gerald frieder, son of Mrs. Max known the conlounten a2 ee ee: as 
at the National Academy and in BG OH Frieder, also of New York, and the| daughter, Millicent, to Henry G. 
Florence, Italy. The marriage of Miss Zon&/late Mr. Frieder. The prospective) Elwell Jr., son of Mr. and Mrs. 
Mr. Cooke is an alumnus of Jesus|Horn, daughter of Mr. and Mrs.|bride is an alumna of Ohio State|Henry G. Elwell Sr. of Roselle, 
College, Cambridge University, and|Karl Willard Horn of Chatham,|University. Mr. Frieder was|N.J. The wedding will take ples 
was a research fellow at Yale and|N. J., to Alvin Ruml, son of Mr.| graduated from City College. He/|in the autumn. 
Harvard. Formerly special corre-|and Mrs. Beardsley Rum! of New served in the Army Air Forces; Miss Livingston attended Union 
spondent here for The Times of| York took place at the home of) during the war. Junior College and received a B. A. 
London, he has been since 1939)her parents Sunday afternoon. The| The wedding is planned for the| degree at William Smith College, SAT. HIGHT, MAY 4th 
chief special correspondent for the| Rev. Pierson Harris of the High- autumn. Geneva, N. Y. Her fiance was and continuing sightly through June Ind 
a —— affairs. He is _— . Avenue Con S =~ ii, graduated from the Newark Col- IM AIR CONDITIONED CARNEGIE HALL 
also United Nations correspondent urch in Orange, + Jy per- lege of Engineeri : 7o MEMBERS OF TH 
for The Manchester Guardian. formed the ceremony. \ Rs fe Mra, Ernest Heath Jr. a lieutenant in yh Tor forty! ae Sn ie nae qares 
The bride, escorted by her fath-|_ 4 daughter was born to Mr, and| months, including eight SAT. S20"..c Paty A, Seerte: 
; Mrs. Ernest He Heath Jr. of 6 5 Kenton montane) . ean WAU cht Wekaice, 
Edith M. Adler a Bride- Elect er, had Miss Ann Rumi, sister of nry rea Fr. Of © of service as a radar officer in ss PO may 
the bridegroom. as maid of honor.| West Fifty-second Street on Satur- 
Specia) to Tus New Youn Ties 4 - ’ day in the Doc South Pacific area. Ta Teng are 
GREENWICH. Conn.. April Homer Justin Lubold of New York |@#Y in the tors Hospital. Mrs. —_— ae we St whit PARA is 
acon Sabon Aiter of ae te —s was best man. Heath is the former Miss Virginia Geoffrey Bin ide H take Sy Bayi Eke,  Merreper 
shin ‘aiean: nm aeeeee eae the|.. Mrs. Rum! was graduated from Ryan, daughter of Mrs. EB. Haines y Snore ave Son | MON. RINE DY H ah ANGE TROUPE: 
piace, Radcliffe College. Her husband is|Ryan and of T. Reade Ryan, both| A son was born to Dr, and Mrs. | “AY #% hows ne . ‘ROBAn 
engagement of her daughter, Edith). siumnus of Phillips-Exeter|\of this city.’ The child will be|Geoffrey Herman Binneveld of 301| TUES. 
M., to Albert L. Trowbridge, #0N | Academy and attended Harvard/"@med Elizabeth Jolly. Both of her|East Twenty-first Street on Aprii|] #4¥ 7 
= my “yo a of | University, later serving as a first|parents were in the armed forces 21 at the Lying-In Hospital. Mrs.) WED. 
ear eg : ~ 2 e prospective| Meutenant in the Air Transport/during the war, her mother as a) |Binneveld is the former Miss Ellen} way om 
“— e attendec — hoisi i n| Command in Europe. second lieutenant in the Wac and| Whitt, daughter of Dr. and We THURS. 
a ne neg gag amy a y her father as a second lieutenant,/William E. Whitt of of Abington. Va..il sav om 
Her fiancé, han ga eaten a ncn or |Marymonnt Alumnae to Hold Tea|' AUS. They have been honorably|and Yalaha, Fia. e child will be! FRI. 
versity of Missouri, did graduate|. Members of the Alumnae of meenee Sep Om father GAY tom 
work at the’ University of Michi-/Marymount College will hold a 
an. He served three years in the\C®d party and tea in aid of the 
acific as « lieutenant in the/Centenary Fund of the Religious 
Navy. jof the Sacred Heart of Mary on 
as " eee Saturday at the Park Lane. Miss 
, , Molly Lane heads the committee in 
Rosalie Holtsberg Fiancee (charge of the plans for the benefit, 
Special to Tus New Yore Trcma, and Miss Frances Dougherty is co- 
NEW ROCHELLE, N. Y., April|chairman. 
30—-Mr. and Mrs. George Holts-| 
berg of this city have announced|/ Daughter to Edward Escoffiers 
the engagement of their daughter,| A daughter was born to Comdr 
Rosalie, to Harris Mayer, son of| Edward L. Escoffier, USNR, and 
Mr. and Mrs. Abraham Mayer of|Mra. Escoffier on April 23 at the 
New York. Miss Holtsberg was United States Naval Hospital tn! 
graduated from Bennington Col- Boston. Mrs, Escoffier was the! 
lege, Vt. Her fiancé is an alumnus former Miss Lucile L O'Reilly, 
of New York and Columbia Uni-|daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Edward 
versities. He is now working on J, O'Reilly of New York. The child 
his doctorate in physics at the|will be named Lucile Lauretta._ 
University of Chicago —— : = a FOUR-ACT SCREEN PLAY 
-— tS x ™ Ae Pr q 4 J 
> IhGo SHC Ge 1% : } “THE CITY OF BLOOD” 
Notes |) : comaT OR SALE | 
NEW YORK 
Mr. and Mrs. William Barclay 
Harding of this city and Washing-| 
ton are at the Weylin. 
Mr. and Mrs. Charles C. Nott) 
are expected to come to Mayfair! 
House today from their 
home at Sea Island, Ga 
Mr. and Mrs. Howard Bruce and! 
Miss Rosalie Bruce have arrived 
from Elkridge, Md., and are at the) 
Waldorf-Astoria. 


Dr. and Mrs. J. Scott Willock|‘ 


of Baltimore are at the St. Regis. 

Mrs. John L. Given has returned 
from Pinehurst, N. C., and is at 
the Savoy-Plaze. 

Mrs. Jean F. Waggaman 
Washington is at the Rits-Cariton. 

Baron and Baroness Jan C. Van 
Eck have come to the Carlyle from| 
Santa Barbara, Calif 

Mr. and Mra. Albert D 
of Huntington, L. L, 
Ambassador 


smith| oy 
are at thelg 


at EDWAROS 
JOUN 
SEBASTIAN 


. 
OINNER AND SUPPER 


LEO REISMAN 


end hie Orchestre 


MISCHA BORR 


end his Orchestre 
alternating ot Supper 
Cover from 10:30, $2 


LUNCHEON FASHION SHOW 
THE SERT ROOM 
Wednesday, May | 
The Tailored Women 


© NORO MORALES RHUMBA DANSANT 
la al ‘ 


al yore 
ye encallet The 
nes Th) ernie ot 


© 
seen wAb Le 


pAN 
iat 


ee | 


{' the Naion” 


149 EAST 57th ST. 
Supervision: Ovear Schimmermen 


EV = SATURDAY | 
35 :00-—6 :30 


Write W. A. 908 A 30607, an i 
UGnement 2 7950 


Times Halt—Tonight at 6:30 


=: RISMAN 


«Ma FRITZ JAHODA ;;,2: 


Piane 


BROOKLYR ACADEMY MUSIC 
SAT, EVE. MAY 4, af 8:30 


FORZA del DESTING 


ANRC a 


ont 
of atm vean's- 
CAQGEST Ane mest 
DISTINGUISHED RESTAGRARTS 
BREAKFAST 
LUNCHEON 
COCKTAILS 


11440 BROADWAY + 


|| Bicti LTION. DOLLAR E ‘AR BABY 


with mera & McORACKEN 

LVIN, Stead St. Ww of 8 of an ct. 

ves. $30. MATS. TODAY " SAT. 2: 
Beat au formances 


« Available For Ali Per 
MAIL ORDERS FILLED 
2 
MATINEE TODAY ‘ives. «rte 


“TREMENDOUSLY og 
nee x. Rn. 4 


Born ZESTERDAY | BEE 


one 5 vy & 
x KANIN 
Lyceum | THEA. “ao mn ot. tof 8 


avn ey 
C4 MISTER 


LO AVERBACH 

tty Garrett 
eee ‘Gaectes by eopent u. gosees 
MATIONAL, 4(et St. W. Sway. PE. 6-8220 
Be@e. £55. MATS. TooaY & SAT. os bib 


L Sy 


BARGAIN MATINEE SATURDAY |" 
CARMEN JONES 


8 A. HAMMERSTEIN 24 
SHORT 


ed by MASSARD 
Lanretto Directed Char a ws 


$1.20, imel. 


wy. city vchurén. ind W. 55th. Cirete 6-800 | 


THE THEATRE RE GUILG Presents 
CAROUSEL. a ew 


Musical Play 
Book 4 "Lyrice by O8CA 
Directed by AOY 


AGNES de mite 
tt—ive Withers 
Christine 


Mie |1_R 


sv CHRISTIANS &™ HOMOLKA 


MBER, | "MAMA 


BR. BISHO 
Buse 8 Box. 
Share 


36 Ghers. Mets. Tou'w 6 Oat. 2:35 
7th Year! ‘A PERFECT COMEDT™ 


LiF TE 


WITH, FAT! 4ER 


Recta a6e 
ve tnd Gun 6.40 Wet St.& Sun Ne Mon. Pert. 


MARY MARTIN 


Story with Music 


LUTE SONG 
eViou ft Tha Ew? w a md Ci. 6-018 


‘tees. tact. Sua. 6 6:00. Mate. SAT. & SUN. 140 
our 7 THE THEATRE @uviLo'’s "MUSICAL | HIT 


RL dehy eltadas 


Book 4 Lyrica ae Rh HAMMERSTE(N, Be 
Directed by UBER be ty ULIAN 


"rity wid “Ser iAwe pure 
warTso TO" 
Thee. 46h St. w a’ war 

ie. os Mats. TOR'W a Sat. at 2 


The Thesire Guild & John © Wilson present 


UNT  FONTANNE ™ 
MISTRESS MINE 


wine RATTIGAN 


Brynner 


PE. 64-9540 


| EMPIRE These, aed w a = 
Sai at i» 


Eves. 6:30. Mate TOM'W & 


THRATRE INCORPORATED pranente 
GERTRUDE 


SSEY 


P YOMA i I y 


TMone 4 
AE ore Theatre, W. 47 St. Cl. 6.0500 
vs.8 30. Mats. Teday & Sat. 2:50 Mail Orders F tiled 


A. ate. +. 6215 | 


"THE MAGNIFICENT ENT YANKEE 


Louis CALHERN 


BOVALS Tee SOY of B way. wo 
Eves. of 6: 30-61.20 to 4.96 

$1.20 te $2 & Sat. $1.00 te 3.8, 

Seats a Bos Ores Ser aS for au BA 


| MAT! NEE TODAY * 


ee reef 
THE. RED MILL 
i ot Thea oe Myra: Boretm a "Cams 

Matinee TODAY 
Martha SCOTT. John BEAL 
HE VOICE. OF THE FURTLE 
Fit MATINEE TODAY. 2:40 

3, arg ie ASS 


MATINEE TODAY” 4.8y- "23° 


eves. « em 
“A SWELL SHOW SOLID HIT.”—Rice, Poet 
Stanley Gilkey & Barbara Payne present 


RAY BOLGER 


| Tee 10M MAKE READY 


Staged r— Soun at  aRaY AN 


ADELPHI Thee. Seth Ot. & of Bway. Ct. 6-c007 





YORK TIMES,*WEDNESDAY, MAY I, I 


-THE PLAY 


jmarry him; the father knows and 
latill considers him as a son. The 
mother, who had been committee! 
chairman for tolerance, turns sud-| 


‘\ 3 L + AMUSEMENTS THE NEW 


FOX AGAIN HALTS | “IX Actisc. A 
FOREVER AMBER’) "oi 


Director—Peggy Cummins’ 
Title Role Part Indefinite 


f , 7 ' engeee ERENT 


46. AMUSEMENTS 


| With This German Tenor RITA HAYWORTH io ‘GILDA’ 


D4 4 
lt s All or Nothing at All’ GLENN FORD - ooo Macready - Jos 
oe ' Calleie 
on 
North American Newspaper Alliance. Extre! BLOCK + SULLY FF y od 

BERLIN, April 30-- Opera STAGE SHOW: 
stars are not singing just for 
their supper in Germany today. 
A tenor named Beirer of the 
Berlin Municipal Opera made the 
following demands before con- 
senting to appear as Don Jose 
in a festival performance of 
Bizet'’s “Carmen” at Neustrelits: 

Seventy-five dollars for each 
performance; 

A heated hotel room for two; 

Luncheon and dinner with | 
meat at least once a day: | 

One pound of butter and two 
loaves of bread; 

Two second-class railway tick- 
ets and the necessary travel 
permits. 

Neustrelitz has regretfully de- 
cided to get along without Herr | 
| Beirer’s talents, according to 

Nacht Express, Russian-licensed 
evening newspaper. 


Plea for Tolerance 


THIS, TOO, SHALL PASS. « play in three 
acts, by Don Appell mpeee by me euthor 
* 


M 
‘Spanish and Russian Music Richera Nearer _ David‘ anes i un denly against the marriage, and, as! 
Featured on PrograngWhich tt eTecander jova "Gienes|a sacrifice, her own son flings) 


spadpenes 
Dr. Steven Alexander Ralph Morgen | . | 
himself under his friend's depart-) 
W rk ees Sorrel! anamaker 
Includes Dance asitig Aces wey Gey ing automobile. The son dies, the! 


By LEWIS NICHOLS \father telle his wife he never had 
By MARK A, SCHUBART In “Thts, Too, Shall Pass,” Don | understood her, the mother is left 
A program devoted entirely to|Appell has turned a playwright’s alone when the girl goes off to 
Spanish and Russian music wasjeye on the question of religious) New York with her fiancé 
presented at Gernegie Hall lastitolerance. As it opened last eve-) Something could be made of the| 
night by the Schola Cantorum un-|ning at the ‘Belasco, however, it|theme, although not by Mr. Appell) 
der the direction of Hugh Ross.|was unfortunately clear that he|in his present mood of purple writ- 
Paul Draper and Ana Ricarda,/had not also turned a playwright’s ing, and of setting down two or 


; three cliches when one would be) 
dancers, joined the chorus in sev-|practiced hand, Mr. Appell's inten-| ore than enough. The characters 


eral dance works, and soloists for|tions are above reproach, but his gay the expected things, in the ex- 
the evening were Elaine Barrett,|Product is flabby and weak. The pected way—e. g.: “We'll dance and 
soprano, and Gerald Warbur, ‘cell- aed eet of aiieg onion ne ages wee a +e. — 

4 . s 60 wo 
ist. Assisting artists included/s,g as his own director he has mess A esie. Ak the , Bh oe 
Ethel Johnson, soprano; Selma|permitted, or ordered, his players |fore the mother feels the tug of 
Hurwitz, contralto; ~Warren i 


_— 


incrio BERGMAN - Grecory PECK 
wFreo nitexcocks SPELLBOUND’ 


ALFRED HITCHCOCK'S 
OR CARTOON . ‘PASSING PARADE’ . NEWS 


to Tus New Youx Times 
HOLLYWOOD, Calif., April 30— 
Twentieth Century-Fox has halted 
production on “Forever Amber” 
after being in production with the 
Kathleen Winsor novel for four 
weeks. It is understood that both) 
John M. Stahl, director, and I Ky | 
the British actress who 
was portraying the name lead, will 
have new assignments and that 
the Technicolor film will not be put 
back into production for at least 
three months r 


Specia 


OVER: 
. 


PARADISE | A mamorabie best ster becomes » teu! octure' LC) MM ODDEN 
Socom © IVE) SONNY yOAN dee avt & om 5 
VALENCIA) LAME-TUFTS-CAULFIELD)DELANCEYO@ our caigp 
[ETINETON |PsRamouNrs SLAGLES’ NEN NCALivgg ARES A WE 
steven |g, SUSE ae are 
Miss Eotertainment treat of a eome 


Ee... ‘VACATION 
the whole family’ 


Staats 


TOmMOarow 


Cummins, 


PITKINGg vrom 
pK. To. | MARRIAGE’ 
a” 


TRI 0 
M RIBORG PARADISE 
VALENCIA 


- 





oe @ the most 


. : : R.|to cling so close to the 
Whether Miss Cummins will con- Paul Douglas of “Born Yester- Walworth, baritone; George L. 


tinue in the “Amber” role is indef-\day,” who won the $500 Clarence! 


ne of the religious silver cord, the char- 
bathos they often tumble over.jacters dance up and down stairs 
‘This, Too, Shall Pass” is another|in a sort of a conga line. Toward 


In CotoR.7 
‘THE ENCHANTED FOREST’ 


EOMUND LOWE - BRENDA JOYCE 


te ebte em mate 
the werte! 


LEXINGTON 
OLYMPIA 


Headley, bass, and an ensemble of 


woodwind, brass and percussion in- Ting STREET 


Sird STREET 
176th STREET 


of those cases of the good heart!the end they stand in attitudes,| SPring Festival to Aid Blind 
struments. being not strong enough to sup-\wringing their hands, speaking) Ray Lev, pianist, will give the 


Though the evening represented|?°rt the body. slowly in low, vibrant voices, Asj|firet half of the program of the! ¢fouyicvano| @@ CLARK | GREER 
an attempt to present an unusual op Sar |the Jewish boy, Sam Wanamaker|Spring Musical Festival of the), ONEVIS ABLE ARSON 
~ |program, far from the beaten paths| Mr. Appell’s play is based on the gives a human performance, but|New York Association for the! } a. one ’ 
‘of choral concerts, {t could not be/Christian and Jewish religions, and|Ralph Morgan, Kathryn Givney,|Blind at the Lighthouse Audito-) #aiemount vous “ADVENTURE 
VSKY termed @ wholly successful occa-|how their distinctions and accom-|Jan Sterling and Walter Starkey|rium, 111 East ———— 

ision, There were works for cho- 


carries a loss to the company of 
ALONSO, EGLE night, She wili| ATES | smpeT ME ON 
j panying prejudice work on thelare troubled both by script and di-|at 8:30 o'clock tonight. She will] /SATES "| «meEy ME ON BROADWAY’ 
‘rus: for chorus with one dancer;|members of a Midwestern family.jrection. Raymond Sovey's setting|play numbers by Bach, Schumann, | 
with two dancers; 


approximate!) $300 Oo. 
{ J KINGS >| MARJORIE REYNOLDS . PRED BRADY 
SCORE IN ( NY fi for chorus and|The son of the house comes home)|looks too comfortably homelike for|Chopin, Rachmaninoff and Kaba- 
ivocal solo; for voice and piano; 


[This is the fourth delay in 
the film production of Kathleen 

from the Pacific with a soldier;most of the activities of “This,jleveky. The second half will be) — ‘ -~ 

tor voice and dancers: for dancers, friend. The daughter knows that/Too, Shall Pass.” Those activities|given by the Kings Glee Club and) a SMOOTH as SILK 

1 ensem- 1TH 

Performance of Ballet Draws/chorus and instrumenta : 

KENT TAYLOR - VIRGINIA GREY 


Winsor's story. The first three 
the visitor is a Jew, but wishes to are just unreal. ‘the WQXR String Quartet. 
ble; for voice and ‘cello solo—a 
| Ovation at Metropolitan— Gomme php ext 
| ‘THROW A SADDLE ON A STAR 
Th 


delays have been caused by Miss 
r 
|program much too varied and too 
| : Pree as with short pieces to cre-|OSCAR STRAUS TO CONDUCT | guesses 
Curtain Calls Persist ate any sort of sustained effect. s ay poy om Manhatron i 
Moreover a concert, which, after|Composer to Lead Special ‘Pop’ “ 
all, must also contain showman-| Program at Robin Hood Dell KEN CURTIS - JEFF DONNELL 


Cummins’ recurrent illnesses 
STARTS 
By JOHN MARTIN MORRC 
ship, cannot make its audience fee! ho Seangis? love. 7 


Stahl's withdrawal from the pro- 
The rare appearances of Alicia|.+ ‘home when artists are con- 


inite but it iv stated by the studio| Derwent prise for giving the best! 


: h , «| 
that Mr. Stahl will not be the di-|,on.featured performance in the 
rector when production resumes.| , tas 
It is further understood that the | mate division. 
stoppage of production at this tine" 


4éth STREE 
LINCOLN $0 
ORIENTAL 
PREMIER 
Wi. PLAINS 


MERICAN [@ABLE’S BACK ~ AND GARSON'S GOT Him! 


. ee 
try 
THEATRES 
CWECKED 





PLAZA 

PROSPEC 
WILLARD 
WOODSIDE 
_ wee eee ee 
MT. VERNON 
YONKERS 





duction was by “mutual agree- 
ment” between Fox Studios and 
the director, according to The 
United Press. | 


John Loder has been signed by! 
Hunt Stromberg to portray a men-| 
ace part in “Dishonored Lady” in| 
which his wife, Hedy Lamarr,| 


at PROSPECT 


Wey GARLAND 
‘SINGING 


Specisl to Tue New Youn Times. eon 


Alonso in the title role of “Giselle”! 
| with the Ballet Theatre are always 
jan occasion, and last night's at the 
|Metropolitan Opera House was no 
jexception. With André Eglevsky 


| 


jin an equally rare appearance as 


plays the titular role. Previously 
announced for the principal cast 
were Dennis O'Keefe and William 
Lundigan. Eddie Albert has been 
set by Walter Wanger for one of 


stantly walking in and out and); pHILADELPHIA, April 
changing places; when music/Ogcar Straus, composer of “The 
stands are being moved and light-|chocolate Soldier” and other pop- 
ing effects changed every three Or| jar operettas, has been signed as 
four minutes. One felt last night| one of the conductors in the group 
that the music was being con-| of “pop concerts” included in the 


Th 


story ever toldi 
JOHN PAYNE 
MAUREEN O'HARA Yas 
WILLIAM BENDIX ‘Sw 


the two male leads opposite Susan 
Hayward in the forthcoming Uni- 
versal picture “Smash-Up.” Miss 
Hayward is secheduled to go to 
New York Friday where she will 
appear in a kidnap scene to be 
filmed for the picture in Central 
Park A camera crew also will 
film background material in Sut- 
ton Place and in various night 
clubs and radio studios 

Armand Deutsch of Story Pro- 
ductions is negotiating with Olivia 
De Havilland for a starring ap- 


|Albrecht, the performance won an 
jovation, and curtain calls persisted 
jlong after the lights had been 
jturned up for the intermission. 

| It is» altogether understandable) 
ithat with the supreme Giselle of 
| Alicia Markova available the 
younger ballerinas of the company 
seldom have a go at this famous 
jrole, but it is eminently desirable 
|that they should do so from time 
jto time. Certainly this is true of 
| Miss Alonso. She is one of the most 


j 


|extraordinary young artists in the 


stantly interrupted and that the 
concert was moving in fits and 
starts, instead of evenly and pur- 
posefully. 

Nor was the standard of musical 
performance high enough to com- 
pensate for these staging awk- 
wardnesses. The chorus sang 
cleanly and well on occasion, but 
the male voices sounded weak, and 
the piano accompaniments were 
unconvincing. Mr. Draper's danc- 
ing is pleasing at times, but last 





seventeen-week summer program 
at Robin Hood Dell, which opens | 
on June 24. 

| Mr. Straus, making his first ap-| 
|pearance here as a concert conduc- 
tor, will lead a “Viennese Eve-| 
jning” at the Amphitheatre in 
Fairmount Park. The program 
will feature many of his own com- 
positions together with selections | 
iby Johann Strauss, Franz Lehar) 
land others. Mimi Benzell, Metro-| 
politan Opera soprano, has been 


TWE FOUR 
GMIGER SNAPS 


‘Sentimental yas 
Journey‘: 


———— ond 2nd feorwe 


Exciting New Mystery Thriller! 


CAROLE LANDIS - WILLIAM GARGAN 


EHIND GREEN LIGHTS” 


LAST TIMES TODAY 
ALRAMOEA - COLISEUM - 0157. - 08ST. - 58ST. - RIVERSIDE - 2357. - CASTLE WILL 
CHESTER - FORDHAM - MARBLE BILL - PELAAM - NEW ROCHELLE - WHITE PLAINS 


BING CROSBY - INGRID BERGMAN 


“WALTZ TIME’ 


CAROL RAYE - PETER GRAVES 
AVE - PETER 
‘FEAR’ 
PETER COOKSON - WARREN WILLIAM 
se RSCY) Beacon Tonnes 
TAY 81000 fred Mac MURRAY w “PARDON MY PAST’ 
BORO PARK Tame AND SPARS'—Ntred Drake - lanet Bar 


KAWEO' (UP GOES | ‘DAKOTA’ 
spoonen| MAISIE’ JOHN WAYNE 
= 


‘ ANN SOTHERN 
AYFAIR TRANGE ~ Syéeey Greens tveat 
phe “TARZAN ANO THE LEOPARO WOMAN 


‘THREE § 
ae 6 he av 
CANAL... | THE SPIRAL STAIRCASE’ — Dorothy McGuire 
od ‘RIVERBOAT RHYTHM’ .Leon Errot 


CONTEST 
pos OG STAGE 
$#Ow' 


li7th STREET 
GRAND 
NATIONAL 
POST ROADWS 


ee 
marema! tame 


Bith STREET 
AVENUES 


VODVIL 


Towire/ 

at 175th ST 
| The JARRETTS 
at PROSPECT 
PRINCE HARA 
VODVIL 


ose a 
MT VERNON 
ORPHEUM 
MELBA 


‘GETTING GERTIE'S | WE WAR K 
State 
BREVOORT 
0 70804 MAOm 
ELSMERE 
“ ee aioe FF 
WARWICK Ff 
lon 6 atoms ff 


victory 


> & RO ave 


Sonberberter’ / ge 


ot FFERSON 
' 


rv ORIENTAL 
MasTER KEYS 
feos of COS 


PITKIN 
AMATEURS 
TONITE 
at BEDFORD 


HARDEEN, IR 
GUEST STAR 


pearance in the proposed film ver-|¢isiq- her technical accomplish- night, in the vastness of Carnegie/signed as one of the soloists for | 
n of Taylor Caldwell'’s current/ ments are prodigious, she has an 


Hall) and against a distracting) Straus’ concert. 
:ovel “This Side of Innocence.” |background, he did not seem at 
Erle Kenton is to produce and 7 eee — eo See best. Miss Ricarda appeared; London Canteen to Continue | 
rect “Vigilantes Return” for Unl-| wide of range and emotionally to be beset by similar handicaps London's Stage Door Canteen, | 
versal Ann Gillia goes into the honest: as an individual she has In all, over twenty songs, arias) which had been scheduled to close! 
st of the Abbott and Costello) neauty, warmth and a wealth of| and dances were heard during the| down the end of June, will con-| 
The Ghost Steps Out.” |temperament. That a Giselle of|evening, the only lengthy work/tinue operating through July 31,| 
stature should emerge from these|being selections from Granados’ according to a decision made by!) 
qualifications is in no wise sur-|“Goyescas,” which were sung andithe board of directors of the 
|prising. Given more performances| played by various instrumental and American Theatre Wing. A re-| 
spaced less far apart, it should de-|vocal combinations. Other com-/cent request from the Army, for-| 
velop into a\mémorable one, posers and transcribers represent-|warded by Lieut. Col. Warren P.| 
It is superbly danced, and it is|ed on the program were Morera,/Munsell, suggested that the Wing 
me Stolen Life,” a Warner|for the most part admirsbly|Wagenaar, Murrillo, Copland, Ka-|keep the canteen open “as all! 
Brothers drama _ starring Bette| played. The first act, when Giselle|balevsky, Shostakovich, Knipper,|other canteens were closing in the) 
Davis, who appears in dual roles.|is the peasant maid, has exception- Maganini and Pittaluga. British capital.” 
Dane Clark, Glenn Ford, Peggy'al color, and certain passages in = — 
Knudsen, Walter Brennan, Charlie|the action are unusually rounded 
Ruggles and Bruce Bennett head/and given more than the customary 
the supporting cast. Curtis Bern-|dramatic justification. In the sec- 
hardt directed from a screen play | ond act, when she has become an) 
by Catherine Turney Atienchanted spirit out of the tomb, | 
the Winter Garden the newcomer|there is poetry and sentiment and, 
is “So Goes My Love,” a roman-jagain, dramatic justification. At! 
tic comedy starring Don Ameche|present the one element in the 
and Myrna Loy. Jack H. Skirball/ work that Miss Alonso has slighted 
and Bruce Manning produced the/is its period. This ballet is perhaps 
picture for Universal from the|the masterpiece of the Romantic 
book, “A Genius in the Family”|Revolution of a century ago, and 
by Hiram Percy Maxim. Richard/inherent in its very being is the 
Gaines, Rhys Williams, Bobbyjrather lush “spirituality” that ani- 
Driscoll and Molly Lamont are|mated that important movement 
among the featured players. as a whole. To miss an awareness 
lof this is to miss the flavor and! 
Samuel Goldwyn has acquired) much of the magic of its re-crea- 
pre-publication screen rights to/tion in the perspective of our own 
“I Thee Wed,” a novel by Gilbert! time. 
W. Gabriel. The book, which is) mr. Eglevsky’s Albrecht is done 
slated for publication next year,|/with a fine modesty which keeps 
is described as “a historical ro-| Giselle rightly ag the center of the 
mance set in the post-revolution-| drama It is acted with taste and 
ary town of Asylum, which Wwa8|sincerity and danced wonderfully. 
built as an American refuge for|Never have his elevation and his 
Marie Antoinette.” |brilliant batterie seemed more ex- 
wleene & total| c!ting or his easy technical com- 
te. and mand more welcome. 
News| Marjorie Tallchief as Myrtha 
jand the others of the customary 


in 80 


McCAREY'S BOSTON RD | ‘MEXICANA’ —Tito Guar + Constance Moore 


ond bitters avt | ant ‘DANGEROUS INTRUDER . Craries Arnt 


Moth STREET] HOUSE OF HORRORS } ‘SPELLBOUND’ 


ond #O00~4! Lend WHE Ce De uO 
_WRAGL © Mot 5 Co 


‘LESH AND FANTASY 





‘The BELLS of ST. MARY'S’ 
“SONG OF MEXICO’ 


Adele MARA - Léger BARRIER 
OYCAMAN 


ore sreeer 


Of Local Origin 


wo new filma wiil arrive in 
midto theatres this morning. 
4 Hollywood the attraction 


————— 


al 





LEOM ERROL - FRAMKME CARLE ond Orch. 


YOU MUST BE ' 
A SHE DEVIL! 


you couldn't 


OYEER - KENMORE - FLUSHING - RICHMOND ML - STRAND 
BING CROSBY - INGRID BERGMAN 


nays ‘The BELLS of ST. MARY’S’ 
Sur ol tke NIGHT’ B SONG OF manICE? 


CLERS - Wares WHLLiAM . lames (T8OR Adele MARA - Léger BARRIER 


Bing CROSBY-Ingrid BERGMAN "BELLS OF ST. MARY'S’ 
* 
COLUMBIA O25 [John WAYNE ‘DAKOTA’ & Ann SOTHERN - MURPHY “UP GOES MAIS’ 


COLONIAL = 
Bway & 62 S¢.| ioheny WESSMULLER Sree ret @ cairn jase a | - rere 


Claudette COLBERT George ORENT -Orson WELLES “BEHIND GREEN 
‘TOMORROW IS FOREVER’ @ UGHTS’ canis 


ALBEE 


MELO OVER! 2° WEEK 
4IRST SHOWING ++ BROOKLYN 





Save yourlipstidk, girls, 
he plays for kdeps in — 


Dark CORNER 


make me feel 
like this if you 


weren't!” 
—" 


ALDEN 


samata 


reece " 
NEWARK 
New Jersey 


Cent uer. fon 


suninmes a 
SULTON & 
04 KALE - 


Paramount will @ROOKEY AH 


of sixty-four short subjec 
104 issues of Paramount 
during 1946-47, it was announced 


by the company following district 


|cast gave good support. 
sales meetings here Included} __The remainder of the bill con 
jsisted of repetitions of 


“ Michae 
among the shorts will be six two-|* ae oe ~ am ; 
reel Musical Parades, in Techni-| Kidd's a ee ape ae — 
ol " P ’ 5 7s. ~ J . ’ 
color; six Paramount Pacemakers lKriza. and Jerome Robbins’ “Inter- 


a new series; six Noveltoons, six} me 
Popeye and six Little Lulu car-|Pl@y.” with Miss Reed, Mr, Kriza 


toon subjects in Technicolor; six|®"4 Tommy Rall 


Speaking of Animals, six Popular) 

Science in Magnacolor; six un-| JUNIOR LEAGUES TO MEET 
usual Occupations in Magnacolor,| 
six George Pal Puppetoons in|Quebec to Be Host at Annual 


Technicolor and ten Grantland| Conference on May 13-17 


Fice Sportlights 

“Drag ck” ‘ ‘ | Delegates from 160 Junior 
ARs gyi yA gr ag ' arth eagues in the United States, Can- J 
“Terror by Night” is being pre-|2da, Mexico and Hawaii will par- | 
sented today, and tomorrow, at the| ticipate in the conference of the 
Normandie More than 40,000) 48sociation of the Junior Leagues 
children attended specia! morning! f America, Inc., to be hel in| 
“Cartoon Carnivals” staged in| Quebec May 13-17. 
Loew's theatres during the Easter| Miss Cecil Lester Jones of Wash-| 
vacation period, the theatre chain|!ngton, D. C., head of Junior) 
reported yesterday. Similar pro-| Leagues, announced yesterday that| . 
grams are planned for Memorial|®t the opening dinner May 13 the) 
Day |principal address will be made by/ 
the Hon. Louis St. Laurent, Minte-| 
- ter of Justice for the Dominion of 

MUSIC NOTES Canada. John Grierson, chairman, | 

Tonight's events: Verdi's “Aida,'|International Film Associates, and 
San Carlo Opera Company, Rocke-|unti! recently Government Film 
feller Center Theatre, 8:30 o’ciock;|Commissioner of Canada, will ad- 
concert, Down Town Glee Club, | dress the delegates the following 
Channing Lefebvre conducting,)evening 
with Arthur Kent, baritone, as as- At the annual meeting, which 
sisting artist, Carnegie Hall, 8:30;| will take place the final day of the 
spring concert of Music School Set-|conference, delegates will elect a 
tlement, Julius Rudel conducting,|/new president, secretary, a Cana- 
Town Hall, 8:30; violin recital, Ju-|dian representative and four re-| 
lius Risman, Times Hall, 8:30. igiona! directors. 


A program of Chinese music, to 
Mary MacArthur to Go on Stage) 


be performed by Wing-tsit Chan r= CY | ¢ | : : é 
NEW .HOPE, Pa., April 30 (4—| 


t ; 
sented at 8:30 o'clock tonight in|Mary {7 - year - old) ‘ . ~ ed s 
the Parish House of the Church of/daughter of Helen Hayes, actress, | ” “4 : a : = AVE. VASTLY ENTERTAINING .. . FLLED WITH 
WILLIE SHORE sxtt:,’etccre ge 
Doncing Comedian SCREAMINGLY FUNNY COMEDYT—CUE 
Extrol , 49th ST. on BROADWAY —6Oth ST. on MADISON AVE. ——-- , 
ARfoereass 
eee 


the Heavenly Rest by the Iranianjand Charles MacArthur, © play-| 
znstitute and School of Asiatic|wright will begin her theatrical] 
Studies japprenticeship at the Bucks Coun-| 
AN N A M A RY D | C if FY PRES. TRUMAN SEES SPECTACULAR FLEET MANEUVERS 
off the Virginia In the Atiantic—A Powerful 
w Glomorous Star of Radio ond The Metropoliten Opere Navy Task Force . trates Sea-Sky Wartare 
\ DOROTHY McGUIRE 
¥ BOB WILLIAMS ETHEL BARRYMORE 
THE SPIRAL 


ty Playhouse, a summer thedtre| r, 
THE OCCUPATION JOB IN GERMANY— YEAR AFTER VICTORY 
Accent an Comedy 
STAIRCASE 


‘Scariet Street’ Ban Ends (here, in June. Now a student at 
52nd ST. on LEXINGTON Ave. ALLEN ANGEL 
F at 140, 3:46, 5:50. 7:50, 107m 


Special to Tus New Youx Trans |Rosemary Hall, Greenwich Conn., 
Today at (2:25, 2:20, 4:15, 6:10, 805 & 18 
Allee FAYE. Oana Andrews, Linde Darnell 


HER HEART 
BOUND TO 
ONE MAN... 
HER ARMS lhe . 
AROUND '@ SHE HAD ENOUGH MEN FOR FOUR WOMEN 


eae | | PAULETTE Ay 
GODDARD * 
mili and 


COMING! FROD XV ia ive. c some 


GEORGE ORSON 


E COLBERT BRENT - WELLES § 
§ Jouorrowis FOREVER 
| 


E CLAUDETTE 


Rivolk 


Bwoy & 49 & 
Doors Open 9.30 A mM 


A 


ane CTEEMANOMe FCTURE teed by MEO BAO PICTURES me Paramount 


* 
— 


z Saaaaaee ee pete M< 
THE Fadeore, FRAMED FOR TRIPLE MURDER! 


‘The FALCON'S 
‘ALIBI’ 


with TOM CONWAY 


eee silt nant 





j “THIS FILM PACKAGE I$ A HANDSOME GIFT!" —wN. Y. Times 


4 “PURE ARTISTIC es: 
*y GOLD!—Her. Tribune 


NB.C. SYMPHONY 


JAM PERCE 
“A TRIUMPH!“ —N. ¥. Sun Little CARNEGI E-WS7A ST coor tnon ms 


ee 


“IT MAKES EVEN THE BEST AMERICAN 
FILMS LOOK CHILDISH!"-The Nation 


IT HAPPENED AT THE INK 
5" Month! 


MINA FOCH 
Dame May WHITTY 
“MY NAME Is 
JULIA ROSS” 


atil (5.2°05. 4/15,6:15.8°96, 00 «9 


ALL BRIDES ARE BEAUTIFUL 


JOAN FONTAINE 2 
ead From This Day Fownrd © 


* ROSEMARY 0-C Amr 


it 


IN PERSON 


— —- 


“NINE DAYS 
A QUEEN” 


at! .2:35.4:23.6:19,8:10, 10:10? ™ 
| Tom’. ‘THREE STRANGERS 


=— 


(te 


| 
" + |'Miss MacArthur will be an appren- 
ATLANTA, Ga., April 30—The|;. 
motion picture “Scarlet Street,” | “ee in acting and stagecraft and 
; 4 —-— + ——--—- 
85th ST. on MADISON Ave. 


barred from Atlanta screens since|‘* acheduled to appear in a play 
Today at 12:10, 2:09, 4:08, 6:07, 6:06, 10.08 


early in February; will open| With her mother early in July, the 
PARDON MY PAST . 


tomorrow at the Paramount The-|P/#ynhouse has announced 
en plus TARS AND SPARS—Janet Bigir and Alfred Drake 


YORKTOWN ag hy SPIRAL STAIRCASE, Siszst Roy Ethet 


t fter a court batt! yhich ’ 
atre after a court battle in whic Episcopal Actors to Meet 
Barry more 
t VERBOAT Bi 
MIDTOWN 


aneet ee eee San HALIA BWAY.& M57, AC2 sare! 
‘The HOUSE ON 92nd ST.’ 


roy iaitiond “MINISTRY OF FEAR” 


te Frits Leads 


Ginger BOGE Ray MILLAND 
“ 


RA ® 
THE MAJOR & THE MINOR” 


alse BOGART im “PASSAGE te MARSEILLES” 


a Rb we. cee ee eee ee a - 
cording to Judge Bond Almond of officers will form part of the busi-| 
Fulton County Supreme Court, to/ness, after which Channing Pol-| 
protect the producers against pos-|lock, Josephine Hull and Betty 
sible loss during the appeal from|McCabe will speak. Vinton Freed-| 
his ruling ly, president, will preside. ‘AT THE CAPITOL 


the city, its censor and its board) 
wrest PRINCESS O'ROURKE “hiuenftiusier?| « 


of censors were losers. The way The Episcopal Actors Guild will) 
plue MANPOWER with Marlene Dietrich & George Balt 


was opened for exhibition of the|hold its annual meeting Friday) 
~ SCARLET STREET ‘GiNed att: 


B'WAYT and i0ird 
Phone AC 1.1800 


LAST DAY | M-@-M's “ZIEGFELD FOLLIES” In Technicoler | 
IM PERSON XAVIER CUGAT end ORCH,* Extra! Hervey Stone 


film when Miss Christine Smith,|afternoon at the Bijou Theatre,/ 
the censor. and the board failed to/instead of the Henry Miller as) 
post a $10,000 bond required, ac-joriginally announced. Election of| 

eENNETT 
plus SHE WENT TO THE BACES—James Craig 
‘ . 





ee 


BARTON GETS LEAD 
IN ICEMAN COMETH” 


Will Have Central Role in Play| 
by O'Neill Because Dowling, | 
Has Other Commitment 


By SAM ZOLOTOW 


Little did James Barton dream| 
when engaged by the Theatre| 
Guild for a secondary part in Eu-| 
gene O'Neill's play, “The Iceman/ 
Cometh,” that he would sooner or 
later wind up with the central role. 
That's the one originally intended 
for Eddie Dowling, who had to 
bow out simply because he couldn't 
defy the laws of physics by ap- 
pearing in “The Glass Menagerie” 
as well as the “Iceman.” 

For a while the Guild thought 


' 
| 
| 


«s.MUSEMENTS 
For Service Men and Women 


“99 Park,” headquarters of the 
New York City Defense Recreation 
Committee, Inc.,* offers a partial 
list of free amusements available 
today through the generosity of 
the entertainment world and the 
League of New York Theatres. 
Afternoon ticketa from 11 A. M.; 
eventing tickets after 4 P.M. App! 
99 Park Avenue (at Fortieth Street 
for tickets. 

Officers apply to the Officers 
Service Committee at the Hotel 
Commodore for services. 

STAGE PLAYS 

Tickets available at 99 Park Ave- 
nue for matinee and evening per- 
formances of legitimate Broadway 
plays. 

MOTION PICTURES 
Ambassador Paramount 
Astor Rivoli 
Capitol Roxy 
Criterion State 
Music Hall Strand 

and others 
HOUSING 


For sleep! accommodations ap- 


Rly at 90 Park Avenue or te the 
ravelers Aid Society at Pennsy!l- 
vania Station and Grand Central 
Terminal. 


PARTIES AND MISCELLANEOUS 


(Apply 9 Park Avenue for tickets 
to following.) 
Union Service Men's Lounge—Danc- 
ing, refreshments; 9 P. M. 
Arcadia Ballroom—Dancing ; 2 P. M. 
and 8 P. M. 
New York League of Girls Clubs— 
Dancing class; 8 to 9 P. M. 
~— Madison Square Garden; 
2:15 and 8:30 P. M. 
Dancing—Roseland Ballroom; 7:30 
P. M. to 12:30 A. M. 
Roller skating — Columbus Circle 
Rink; 7:45 to 11:15 P. M. 
(For following, no tickets needed.) 
Dance—N. C. C. 8., 17 East Fifty- 
first Street; 8 P. M. 
“—— dance—Brook! Navy Y. 
. C. A., 167 Bands Street, Brook- 
lyn; 8:30 P. M. 


*Member agency of the New York 
National War Fund. 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 


Turtle” on June 1 will bring Bea- 
trice Pearson and Alan Baxter into 
the roles now held by Martha 
Scott and John Beal. There's a 
possibility of Vicki Cummings quit- 
|ting, too. Originally, Mr. Baxter 
was to have replaced Hugh Mar- 
lowe in the Coast facsimile. As a 
result of the change, Boyd Craw- 
ford will succeed Mr. Marlowe. 


The Actors Equity Council, the 
union‘’s governing body, was in ses- 
sion for three and a half hours yes- 
terday to consider charges filed by 
Muriel Rahn, who had been en- 
gaged for “St. Louis Woman,” 
against Harold Nicholas and Rex 
Ingram of that company for con- 
duct “prejudicial to the welfare of 
Equity or its members.” The hear- 
ing was adjourned to next Tues- 
day. 

Old Vic Tickets on Sale 


the avalanche of mail 
orders for the Old Vic's engage- 
ment at the Century again has re- 
tarded the ticket gale. It is now 
announced to get under way to- 
morrow. An extra matinee of 


1946. 


AMUSEMENTS 


TODAY! | 
10 A.M. 
ead and Heke 


\ 
Above... the v 
Happiest Hits 


it was stymied, but it was Mr.\o¢ myste an to unravel itself.|Dorothy 8. Thackrey, owner of The|" 2 p 

O'Neill himself who came through); 4 beet ry wind from May 27|\New York Post. At the moment|“Henry IV (Part 1)” will be given Nn J emory! 
with the inspiration of moving up|through Aug. 3 ia expected to be/there is vague talk of forming 9, chiefly as a concession to 

Mr. Barton. We talked to Mr.\delivered tomorrow. The top price|duplicate company for the road. 
weed age —_ an switch./for the incoming allotment has —— 

vaturally, he was tickled, saying been jacked up to $6 for all eve- Philadelphia Gets a Break 

he would have forty-eight “sides” |ning performances, with no change The campaign inaugurated by e, a a a 
(an actor's measurement for the/in the matinee high of $3.60. The - ~ : 

' The Philadelphia Record to correct|/“Around the World” Monday night 
heftiness of his stint) and some of/present scale, Monday through|+icxet abuses of long standing in|in Boston, but also that of Arthur 
ee ee eee |Thureday nights, ranges upward toirn,, City of Brotherly Love has|Margetson, who was ill. 

All in all, it would provide Mr./¢4 80: Friday and Saturday nights, brought results. Here's an extract|getson returned last night 
Barton with “a mouthful and &|$6. Between now and June 7, thelrrom yesterday's account in Thelinally budgeted for $200,000, the 
brainful of words.” August willientire seating capacity has beeninecord: “For the first time in|cost of the musical already has 
find all hands receiving directorial |resefwed for sixteen more theatre| years the aver Philadelphia|mounted to $295,000 aoeeedln to 
guidance from Mr Dowling. After | parties at a discount rate. , tregoer was able yesterday to\a spokesman en then menngumnel 
‘ pen seg ee Bets Regen sy What brought about the higher! buy choice seats for a hit show at a 
ap mony Mg “ r is — z.iscale? Increased overhead andibox-office prices. Through two) The American Negro Theatre's 
pate mal ® customary f-lobligations to the backers. At/windows in the Shubert Theatre|plan to put on Paul Peters’ play, 
1 de a first the sponsors, Melvyn Douglas|iobby the best tickets for all per-|“Nat Turner,” in June has been 

x and Herman Levin, couldn't se@/formances of ‘Annie Get Your/|called off because of a di - 

Tickets for “Call Me Mister” jeye to eye over booking terms withiGun,’ the new Rodgers-Hammer-|ment between the group and the 

Add to the arcana of show busi-|the Shuberts, who control the/stein musical, passed into the eager|author, who. didn’t want to rush 
ness: Since “Call Me Mister” house. Now that this bone of con-|hands of somewhat flabber ee the production. 
opened April 18 at the National,/tention has been adjusted, Mr.|purchasers. ‘This is the first time} Mary Chase, author of “Harvey,” 
we have gone around muttering/Levin jokingly referred to the com-/T’ve tten good tickets without/is expected here late this week 
why the hit revue had such a/promise meeting with the booking/pull for ages,’ one man said. For|from Denver to hold a powwow 
scanty supply of tickets on hand—/moguls thus: “The fatted calf wasigheer novelty, the day-long scene|with her favorite sponsor and di- 
up to May 25 only. What was in|slaughtered in my honor and when|at the hox-office was about asjrector, Brock Pemberton and An- 
the wind? We bent the ears off|I looked around I found it was/dramatic as anything ever enacted|toinette Perry, regarding the Lon- 
those who should know, but never|myself.” on the Shubert stage. Even the|don reproduction cf the Pulitzer 
got a satisfactory reply. That led} The total production cost of the|proverbial superciliousness of the|Prize comedy. 
us to believe the attraction might/|show is estimated at $118,000 and/|ticket sellers was gone.” “Windy City” made its Bos- 
be transferred to a larger house,jit should take fourteen weeks or ton bow last night. Next Tuesday 
say on Forty-fourth Street, after;jmore to recover the investment.| Defections from the three-char-|night the show will begin a fort- 
May 25. Well, yesterday the skein|One of the major investors is Mra.'acter cast of “The Voice of the|night’s engagement in troit. 


os ge 
aed : 2 
BFS Sa SN ¢ 3 ; 
Fs 44 : « 7 a 
x ay 
a ' ‘ " 
A 
& : . “i 
@ we yet 4 - ‘4 
S oe iS e 7 4 
2, x , 
rd Sb ae : rat é 
re A 
= 9 ; > 
, —e ' a | 
Ree ‘ 
. 
. 
¥ 


¥ ynigcOll > RU 


bys WANS Ot 


RYAN 
2 


otherwise be able to attend. 
From first kiss 


to last happy 
sigh... it's life 
with love as 


few have ever 





known it! 


‘ nw 


é ile 


A JACK B, SRIRBALL-ORUCE MARKING Prodaction 

Screenpley by BRUCE MANNING ond JAMES CLIFDEN 

Based epee “A Genin ie the Fomily”’ by Hivem Perey Mexia 
Directer of Photography: Joseph Veleation 


¥ 
vy 
tT 


Continuous Performances at Popular Prices 


ci WINTER GARDEN 


— ———_ — 


“More dramatic excitement than 
most flims in town!” —worid Tei 


Showplace of the Nation Rockefeller Center 


SS 
DOUBLY WONDERFUL 
YN HER 


Dougte Rote! 


HALTER BREAN CHARLIE RUGGLES aia 


Sareea “It isa 


& let Filme Post-War 
Seenes Poland's Capital / 


wonderful picture.” 


— Kate Cameron, Daily News 


OLIVIA 


U/armena' STRAND "A! 
Ww 

DeHAVILLAND | J, OUIS 
,GREENSTREET | PR 
Devotion’! “tone 


t 
HOLLY WOES, 


“a 4ae 


. a ~“ 
Ur. WALT 


A. J. CRONIN’S 


GREEN YEARS 


starring GHARLES COBURN 
itt TOM DRAKE - BEVERLY TYLER - HUME CRONYN 


GLADYS COOPER «DEAN STOCKWELL + RICHARD HAYDN 


Directed by VICTOR SAVILLE Produced by LEON GORDON 
Screen play by Robert Ardrey and Sonya Levien 


A METRO-GOLOWYN-MATER PICTURE 


THE MUSIC HALL’S GREAT EASTER STAGE SHOW 


CONTINUOUS 
BWAY AT Sist 


OPENS 10:30 a.m. 


LATE MIONITE FILM 


“as 
Loew's CRITE 


LA S 8th ST near MADISON 
Pa ae a de wv AA | FRED 


AT HIS BESTI“—Life J/ 


pMEDY MUSICALS ", 


MacMURRAY 


DARRYL F ZANUCK 
- OTeLO HTS 


GENE TIERNEY.. 


Lragonuyck 


— Pl 
Te 


{ 
a 700.400. a: ead 10:00 . 
year pate rh WITH BABY= 
AYHOUSE at 3nd Ave. 


sors & Hammerstein's 


rex 


HUSTON - PRICE ~ LANGAN 


JOSEPH L: MANKIEWICZ 


y 5 () STBEWERLY 1300. 


TINK 


ZO. 


He 10:30 ae RRO KY ve. sve sisee 


t DOORS CPEM 1030 AM. 


Reddy MeDewali © Em 
Constance Cummings « 


| Exel. MW. Y. 
Browing 


o Williams 
Clements 


THIS ENGLAND 


JEAN GARIN “iiey Went Five” 


Presenting the teleats of, 
SERNY GOODMAN + DINAN SHORE - 
SeRRY COLOMMA le 
Py TRE RING'S MEN + STERLING HOLLOWAY + THEPIED PIPERS ~ 


saxct's GLOBE 


idnite Shows Every Night 


Mideite 
vd ae 


SAMUEL GOLDWYN 


DANNY KAYE 


ASTOR *m 


‘POORS OPEN 6:90 Am. 
MIONETE SHOW EVERY NIGHT 


IN 
TECHNICOLOR 
THE ANDREWS SISTERS \ 
anor aus, x 


6¢ 


SWAY & 46th ST. 
Doors open at 8.30 A.M. 


FI 1d Ad 





Ray 4 


ANE 
MILLAND - WYMAN 


Merle Oberon, Or 
COME AND @ 
Frances Farmer, } 


A 
Crea 


“ATE FAIR’ 


Shown a 1408, ...6, 490, 620. 8:10. 10 Pm 
Tom’w: ‘Leave Her to Heaven’ 


BELOVED ENEMY 
tan 
&T 
oe! 


herne 
iT 


WHAT NEXT, | 


Aitat 64351 


‘CARLTON + 


BROADWAY 0! 10057 Be, 


_ ace Kid 
rom 


ya tt 


HARGROVE? 


Robt. Walker, Keenan Wynn 
ONE WAY TO Love’ 


Mardi R. Col 
ES Lita Hee. 
Rinse, M. Oberon, J. MeOren 


| 
GARY COOPER. | 
BARBARA BSTANWYCK In| 
i 


GLORIA JEAN in 
ate 


“BALL OF FIRE” & 


“GLORY OF EASTER”—Beautiful and far-famed cathedral pageant . . . produced 
by Leonidoff . . . 
Ensemble, and the Music Hall Symphony Orchestra, directed by Charles Previn... and 


with inspired music by Lucile Cummings, contralto, the Choral 


“ON THE AVENUE”—AIl the gay color and festivity of Springtime, with brilliant 
settings by Bruno Maine . . . the Corps de Ballet and ten dance soloists in fascinating 
fantasy .. . romantic melody by Marian Carter, soprano, and the Choral Ensemble 
« + » Myrtill and Pacaud in exciting novelty . . . glamorous dances in inimitable 
precision by the famed Rockettes. 

DOORS OPEN TODAY 10:15 A.M. «+ Picture at: 10:22, 1:12, 4:06, 7:00, 9:53 
Stage Show at: 12:22, 3:13, 6:07, 9:07 » DOORS OPEN THURSDAY 10:00 A.M. 


RITA HAYWORTH 


rs “BLONDIE’S LUCKY BAY”. 


CPPS TEETH ESET ETE EET HE HEE . 


erreeeee 
. 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. SPORTS 


AND PITCHES A NO-HIT GAME __ (TANTS FAILIN BID (Dodgers Bow to Cubs in 11th, 2-1, 
FOR GARD PLAYERS | And Yield First Place to Cardinals 


L + 


FELLER TOPS YANKS | 
WITH NO-HITTER, 1-0) 


Six Reach Base, 5 on Walks, 
as the Indians’ Ace Huris 
Classic for Second Time 


SPORTS 
BOB FELLER MAKES 1946 DEBUT AT STADIUM 


ry * 


> . o 


es 


¥ 
But Stoneham Plans to Renew| 28@Y, in Relief of Head, Forces Deciding 
Overtures Today—Rain Puts} Run Home With Pass—Chicago Ties Score 


Off First Game of Series on Fielding Lapses in Ninth Inning 


38,112 THRILLED BY FEAT 


. 
- 
7 


th 


_# 


i 
. 
? 


w=— Seo- 
o——Oe 


oo 

. 
Se®uwvw~o e~—seu 
~leonesseecesso 


—“@e2e23ee2a7 


e-euUsceuvurw& 
| 

222, 

SS eCwaw-« 

22° 22e2uNee een 


eed oe ee 
Seee e228 Owe eevee 
| eeeeeee eee 8860 


J 
~ 
= 


Deleendro 


we 
> 
~! 


Total 


Ninth Sets Back Bevens 


By LOUIS EFFRAT 
They said Bob Feller had‘lost his 


i 


"None out whee winning rm 
aRatted for Merulie in © 
bRen fer Becker in sinth 


Tota! a7 21 


m wes ccored 
nth. 


Spasel to Cas Hee Teas Tome Special to Tan New Yous Trucs 
ST. LOUIS, April 30-—-Their ball} CHICAGO, Abril 30—An artistic! emma OH ate . 
clubs held idle by a daylong driz-|pt performance by Ed Head, {'s'\",. 
zling rain, Horace C. Stoneham and/in his first start since his no-hitter Gelen. W. 
Sam Breadon, owners of the Giants)one week » Became & ZTO-| Weiner. 1 
and Cardinals, and their respective|‘®*duery in the eleventh inning to-|Rin J 
day when Hugh Casey pitched four | anderson. ¢ 
managers, Mel Ott and Eddie Dyer, 'straight balls to Dom Dallesandro }."" "*-. 
closeted themselves for three hours|with the bases filled to give the |:Pede 
today in an effort to close a deali|Cubs a 2—1 triumph over the wnateeding 
supposedly hanging fire ever since|Dodgers. The result allowed the 
the old Polo Grounders made their idle Cardinals to move into first) 
$175,000 purchase of Walker meen half a game ahead of the 
per last winter. , rooks. : 
But the session held in the club) For eight innings Head kept; (s\\et (or Heed im tenth. 
at Sportsman's Park ter-|Chicago at bay despite threats in preoniv ae o 


* e186 ¢o-1 
> 
; 


Chiesgo eee 60006861 © 


fast one. They said the war had 
taken too much from the right arm 
of the one-time Iowa farmboy, 
that, in the parlance of the ball 
players, he no longer had it. They 
rade all these and other deroga- 
tory comments during spring 
training and when Feller, after 
winning Mis first league game this 
year, proceeded to lose two in a 
row to the Tigers and White Sox, 
the dissenters weighed in with lots 
of “I-told-you-so” snickers. 

They'll not say it again! 

For, yesterday at the Stadium, 
the 27-year-old Feller pitched the 
.Indians to a 1—6 victory over the 
Yankees that afforded 38,112 fans 
the thrill that only a ho-hitter can 
bring. And that, precisely, was 
what it was, a no-run, no-hit 
achievement against a power- 
packed rT: of pre-war Yankees, 
any &ne of whom—except possibly 
the pitcher—could have wrecked 
the superb efforts of one of the 
greatest twirlers of all time. There 
was drama riding with every pitch 
of Feiler’s. 

When, with one out in the ninth, 
Frankie Hayes, Feller’'s battery- 
mate propelled one of Floyd Bev- 
ens’ offerings high into the lower 
left-field pavilion for his first 
homer of the year, the Indians had 
what they had been seeking from 
the outset, a one-run margin. The 
way Feller was mowing down the 
Yankee hitters, it was apparent 
that one was all Bob would need. 
He needed no more. 


Bears Down All the Way 


Obviously, as would be the case 
in so tightly-waged a contest, in 
which neither hurler received a 
comfortable cushion, Feller had to 
bear down all the way. Bevens, 
while not quite as overpowering 
as the Cleveland moundsman, was 
equally as effective. Only Hayes’ 
round-tripper of the seven safeties 
he yielded hurt him, There were 
other spots where the visitors 
threatened, but on each occasion | 
the big Yankee right-hander) 
pitched his way to safety. 

This was not a perfect game 
for Feller. Six Yankees reached 
base, five via passes and one on an 
error by Lesa Fleming, the Cleve- 
land first-sacker, who booted) 
Snuffy Stirnweiss’ drag bunt along) 
the first-base line at the beginning) 
of the Bottom half of the ninth.) 
When Fleming miscued, the groan! 
from the stands was a tip-off on} 
how hard the fans were rooting 
for Feller to succeed in his bid for) 
a second no-hitter. He turned the 
trick, also by 1—0, against the 
White Sox on opening day of the 
1940 season. 

Tommy Henrich added to the) 
tenseness of the situation by sacri-| 
ficing, his bunt pushing Stirnweiss 
to second, in scoring position. 
Feller now had merely to dispose 
of Joe DiMaggio and Charley) 
Keller—a couple of  set-ups.| 
Against DiMaggio, Feller worked 
ie count to 3 and 2. On the next! 
effort, DiMaggio swatted the ball) 
to short, when Playing-Manager| 
Lou Boudreau, a standout short-/ 
stop all afternoon, scooped it up) 
and threw out the Jolter. 


Kelier Ever Dangerous 


That Stirnweiss moved down to 
third on the play meant nothing 





|New York 


ito the outfield. 


jpaid, exactly how great ‘t was. 


Catcher Hayes has his arm around the hurler as they leave the field. Other members of the team are running to congratulate him and a 


Yankee player is heading for his own dugout. 


Sot ye 
y 


4s a Ma 
The s baller (left) shakes hands wi 
homer brought him victory. 


tery mate, whose 


th his bat 
. The New York Times 


RED SOX, WITH DOBSON, 
SHUT OUT TIGERS, 4-0 


BOSTON, April 30 (P—With 
right-hander Joe Dobson pitching 
his third straight victory with a 
three-hitter, the Red Sox today 
opened their home stand against 
Western competition by shutting 
jout the world champion Tigers, 
1/4—0, before a paid crowd of 18,- 
9/877. As a result, Boston increased 
jits league lead over the Yanks to 


Lemon, ef. 
Bdéwards, rf 
Fieming, 1b! 
Keltner, 9b 


a 

Sorin rf 

DiMeggio cf 

Wf.. 

dreau ss 

Flayes, « 

Mack. 2b 

Feller, p.. 


wi -ecesoeso= 


Total 
Cleveland 


Ren batted tn Hayes 

Home run—Hayes. Stolen bases—Case, Henrich am 

Sacrifices Boudreau Keltner, Stirnweiss, Bed two g es. 

wards, Henrich Double playse—Gordon, Rizzuto While dueling with Hal New- 
houser, the Boston flinger got 


= eo Sirnwelss, Rizzute and Etten; Dickey 
an lasuto Left on bases—Cleveland §& WN 
timely hitting from his team- 


York 5. Bases on balle—Off Bevens 5, Feller 
Struck out—By Bevens 5, Feller 11. Umpires 
Rommel, Byer and Jones, Time of game—2:14 
Attendance—84,112 

<u Etethpeenetereeenteemeeteeenetenenntineeeamemmenmmeeemees 


struck out eleven Yankees and|!#suing three bases on balls, but 

permitted only two balls to be hit; Newhouser presented the first run 

Boudreau’s great|to the Sox with a wild pitch. 
After being greeted with a single 


ow 
4 


jhomer by Bobby Doerr. 


play on Stirnweiss in the first was 
the only really tough one for the 
Cleveland infield to make. Never- 
theless, it was a pulse-stopping | til he had two out in the ninth. 
contest, one of the greatest ever|Hank Greenberg slashed a double 
witnessed here or anywhere. Ask/|Off the left-field fence, but, after| 
the 38,112 fans, 37,144 of whom Dick Wakefield had beaten out an! 
infield roller, Dobson ended the! 


game by forcing Pat Mullin to! 


} 


Has Six One-Hitters 


| ground out. 


Rudy York wag first to score. 


pore 


Letting go with a fast 


Arrives to 


By JOSEPH 


Heavyweight Champion Joe 
Louis appeared a lot more inter- 


mates, including an eighth-inning|ested in baseball than in his im- 
Each pending title defense against Billy 
pitcher had nine strike-out while|/Conn yesterday on his arrival here 


\from his preliminary training dase 


at West Baden, Ind. 
As soon as he heard that Bobby 


by lead-off man Eddie Lake, Dob-|/Feller was slated to pitch for 
son did not givé another hit un-|Cieveland against the 


| Louis ‘eased toward the exit of the 


Yankees, 


new offices of the Twentieth Cen- 
tury Sporting Club, where the 
fight reporters were gathered to 
interview him. 

It may have' been that he was 
anxious to see how hard hitters 


L aiisek i ie 
At Pompton Lakes T oday for Conn! 


turning to his*hotel quarters, Ott 
said: 

“We simply couldn't get any- 
where. They wouldn't part with any 
of the players we would like to 
have obtained and what they did 
offer us consisted of players in 
which we have no particular in- 
terest.” 

On this note the rival factions 
let the matter rest for at ieast 
another twenty-four hours. Stone- 
ham and Breadon said they would 
meet again tomorrow, but neither 
appeared optimistic over the out- 


minated in another stalemate, Re- 


Associated Press 


Although for obvious reasons he 
would not mention names, Ott ad- 
mitted that what he wanted most 
from St. Louis were a right-handed 
hitting outfielder and a pitcher. So! 
far as the fielder is concerned the 
general guess is he is either Buster 
Adams or Erwin Dusek. 

As for the hurler, the Giant offi- 

als have long made it clear they 
would consider any one of the Car- 
dinaly’ topflight flingers. However, 
in view of the still unsettled char- 
acter of the St. Louis staff, Dyer 
apparently hasn't decided what 
starting pitchers he wants to keep 
and so means to stall things off a 
little longer. The Cards have until 
the June 15 deadline to pare their 
big squad down to the thirty player 
limit. 

The postponement cut the cur- 
rent series to two games and the) 


June 3, originally an open date on 
the Giants’ next visit here. South- 
paw Dave Koslo remains at Ott's 
choice to face the Redbirds tomor- 
row, but Dyer was undecided 
whether he would start Fred Mar- 
tin, a rookie right-hander, or the 
left-handed Harry Brecheen. 


Kraus Reports to Giants 


Jack Kraua, southpaw pitcher 
recently purchased from the Phil- 
lies by the Giants, reported to Ott 
from his home in San Antonio and 
lost no time signing a New York 
contract. Kraus had been a hold- 
jout with the Phils this spring. 


one in the ninth inning 


Associates Prées cently released outright by the 


| Reds, who lives in near-by Decatur, 
Iil., called on Ott relative to a trial 
with the Giants. Ott said he was 
holding the matter under advise- 
ment, 


Another ball player to confab 
jwith the Giants as they lolled 
around their hotel lobby was 
|\Cookie Lavagetto, Dodger third- 
sacker here getting treatment for 
a sore arm from Dr, Robert F. 
|Hyland. Cookie will rejoin the 
Flock here Friday. 


M. SHEEHAN 


jJanything to say about it, it will 
be much shorter than last time.” 
\It took thirteen rounds for Joe to 
jcatch up with Billy, who was lead- utteenuupnemmnayss 
jing on points at the time, in their 


~ TI BROWNS TURNED BACK 
Although Louis said that he had| BY ATHLETICS, 12708 


been working out at West Baden 
since March 7, his activities there 
|were confined to hiking through|—The Athletics took advantage of 
jthe hills, chopping wood and play- — = hog yl. —- 
° r 

tn ie ome GO Oe ante pee on | Firat inning and added eight more 

This matter will be taken care| tallies today to defeat the Browns, 
of in short order once he geta| 1? to &, in the first of a three 


ies. 
\settled at Pompton Lakes, where|S*™me ##F 
ihe has thew 4 on several occa-|,, °US# Christopher did not allow 





PHILADELPHIA, April 30 (> 





Gene Thompson, right-hander re-| 


the visitors a hit in the first four T 


four innings, and Brooklyn finally 
solved the relief offerings of Emi! 
Kush sufficiently to acore in the 
eighth. The run crossed on a long 
double into the left-field corner by 


[Eddie Stanky, sending Peewee 


Reese, who had singled, scamper- 
ing home. 
Crowd of 20,234 Present 


At this point the 20,234 North 
Side fans perhaps were almost 
ready to concede these Dodgers 
couldn't be beaten, especially after 
the missed Cub chance in the 
aixth, when Don Johnson opened 
with a double. 

But the folks were pleasantly 
surprised in the ninth. After Head 
had fanned Marvin Rickert, Ed 
Waitkus slashed a single to right 
and there followed the first of the 
chain of events that found the 
Dodgers a bit wanting. Clyde Mc- 
Cullough slapped a double play 
ball to Reese, but Peewee's ever so 
slight juggling of the ball per- 
mitted the speedy Waitkus to slide 
into second ahead of the throw. 

Stanky’s relay nailed McCul- 
lough at first, but the stage was 
set for the next Dodgerism and 
the tie score. Heinz Becker batted 
for Len Merullo and sent a low 
fly ball into dead center field. 
Carl Furillo misjudged its trajec- 
tory and started in on atrot. He 
realized his mistake too late, al- 


though he made a gallant effort) 


at a diving catch. The blow went 
for a single and the score was 
deadlocked. 

Reiser’s Long Fly Caught 

Manager Leo Durocher removed 
Head in the tenth to let Don 
Padgett bat vainly for him and, 
although the bases became filled 
with two out on passes to Reese, 
Stanky and Augie Galan, the Cub 
right-hander escaped when Pete 
Reiser’s fly was pulled down just 
beyond the curve of the right-field 

by Phil Cavarretta. A few 
feet toward center field and Pete 
would have had a long three-run 
hit. 

Came the eleventh and once 
again it was Waitkus who started 
the Dodger downfall, this time 
with a single to left. McCullough 


PIRATES DOWN PHILS 
ON ERROR IN 8TH, 4-1 


PITTSBURGH, April 30 (® 
Tommy ao made a wild throw 
of Frankie Gustine’s bunt with two 
men on in the eighth inning today, 
giving the Pittsburgh Pirates 
enough runs to break a 1-1 tie and 
moving them on to a 4-1 victory 
over the Phils before 4,970 fans. 

Gustine laid down a bunt with 
Frank Colmsn on second and 
Ralph Kiner on first. Hughes 

ged the ball far over Jim 
Pebor's head, Colman and Kiner 
scoring on the error. Bob Elliott 
then cracked out a double to bring 
Gustine across with the third run 
of the inning. 

The box score: 
PRILABELONIA (m) ' 


| 


PiTTseuRGH 
* ' 


Gient de, rf 
Russel! Vv 
Celman 
| Kiner 
Gustine 
Bitiott 
Salkeld 


|\Newse’e. o9.9 
Wyrk. of 4 
Fanis, if | 
iDiM' gio, ef. 
| MeCor'k Ib.4 
Northey. rf 
Tehor, 
| Rich'on 

| eWandell 

| Hemeley. « 


;7¢ 
| 
| 


ef 


w 
»¢ 
- 


Pi) 


2e2e23232-s2e8°0 
2-22-—2——3—-s0 
e222 ——zneese 

s~2*2S828-3080 
e®-2223°28s2eee~ 


evu-wuwe 


Mughes p 


i b> Rarrett 


Runs batted in—Stanky Recker Dealleessandre 

Twe-bdese hite—Johneon MeCulleugh, tanks 
Stolen dase— Reese Sacrificee—Lowrey Jonasson 
MeCyllough Deuble playe—Jofneen. Meruile sad 
Wealthus Stanky, Reese and Stevens Lett 
beiee—Breokiyn §. Chicago AD Bases om balle 
Off Rerowy 1. Head § Cader 2 Kaeh 8 Struck 
out—By Borewey 4. Kash 7 Heed 3 Bits —orr 
Heed 8 in © innings, Casey 2 iw i f 
Lith). Rerewy 3 in 4. Kosh 4 In T 
(peer treed bel)— Met ullough 
pitcher—Kush, Losing pitcher— Casey, Umpires 

Barlick. Pinelli end Ballienfent. Time @ game 
~3: Attendlance— 20 D4 
‘bunted and Casey chose to throw 
to second base when he didn't have 
a chance to get Waitkus. So Bob- 
by Sturgeon also bunted, and 
Casey, after going for the bail 
jalong. the first-base line, backed 
jaway and let Ed Stevens handle it 
| Result: a hit for Sturgeon and 
the bases filled with nobody out 
Dallesandro stepped vp, with the 
ry yelling themselves hoarse, 
nd Casey never got one ball over 
the plate, turning away from the 
jmound toward the dugout almost 
before his final pitch had reached 
Andy Anderson's glove 

Hank Borowy was Jolly Cholly 
\Grimm's starter and hurled air- 
\tight ball until the start of the 
ififth, when he walked Furillo. 
Then Harik took himself cut b»- 
leause of a troublesome blister on 
hig right middle finger end young 
Kush went fn, eventually to gain 
credit for his third straight rel'ef 


victory. 


Cubs Miss Scoring Chance 


The Cubs blew a scoring chance 
in the eighth inning when Stan 
|Hack walked, Johnson sacrificed 
and Peanuts Lowrey singled to 
center. Hack, thinking Reese had 
fielded Lowrey's hit behind him, 
slid back into second base. Then 
Head, trying to pick Hack off, 
threw wild into center field and 
Hack tried to score, but was cut 
idown, Furillo to Reese to Ander- 
son. 


| Dixie Walker's seventh-inning 


line single struck Kush on the 
pitching hand, but the young fellow 
stuck it out... . First hit off Head 
to break his no-hit string was a 
second-inning high bounder by 
Cavarretta. Head lost the ball in 


the sun. 

SENATORS CONQUER 
WHITE SOX IN 7TH, 3-2 
WASHINGTON, April 30 U® 

Buddy Lewis’ only hit today was « 

seventh-inning double, but it drove 

in the run that gave the Senators 

a 3-2 victory over the White Sox 
With the score standing at 2-all, 

Al Evans opened Washington's 

seventh with a single. Ray Scar- 

borough sacrificed and Lewis 
doubled down the right-field foul 
line 

The victory was Scarborough's 
second of the season and lifted 

Washington into a tie with Chi- 

cago for sixth place. Ed Lopat of 

the White Sox was the dourth 
southpaw beaten by the left-hand 
ed hitting Senators this spring 

Dario Lodigiani, with three 
of four, batted in both Chicago 
runs 


The box score 
CHICAGO (A.) 
. r pe 


out 


WASHINGTON (A 


‘ ° 
ob'tsom, Biede 
L@ie ’ eerie 


9 ‘ 
; 6 
‘ 


iain tL 
e2222-2e0e~--—-—e3 


ry 
I 
id 
a 
iu) 
1 
” 
” 
a 


ake out against fast throwers at 
the Yankee Stadium, which also 
will be the scene of his return 
rendezvous with Conn on June 19. 
|Or it may have been that he just 
jwanted to make the most of his 
last fling in society before settling 
down to hard work. Bither way, 
Louis stood not on the order of 
j|his going but up and went as soon 
jas he had satisfied his inquisitors. 


Louls Plans to Carry Fight 


A little heavier than the Louis 

of old, but otherwise in apparent 

¢|good trim, the champion revealed 
$ that he weighed 216 pounds. He 
¢|plang te reduce his poun e to 
5 | 208 at Pompton Lakes,  % 
oo) where he will start serious training 
~‘|\today. He went in at 19944 pounds 


jsions. Half a dozen sparring part-| 
jners will be in the entourage of 
jtwenty that is to accompany the 
champion to his base. 

George Fitch of New Haven, 
Clint Conway of New York and 
Jimmy Bell and George Crawford 
jof Washington are among those 
jwhose unenviable assignment it 
\will be to sample the speed and 
ipunching power of the post-war 
Louis, The champion is fully con- 
ifident that he has lost pone of! 5¢r'd’e 
this.» “My only problems are to S'ph'ns. 
sharpen my punching and get my |McQ!e" 
timing back,” he confided. : 

Louis created a minor sensation | \!.4°..?>.; 
jwhen he appeared in Promoter |Juanich, ef 
|Mike Jacobs’ royal suite above {jirem. *2 
Madison Square Garden sporting a/Sers. ¢ 
luxuriant crop of whiskers that'set LaM hla, 
off to striking advantage his Kinder. p 

iM 


to Boudreau, Feller and every man 
in a Cleveland uniform. Nor did 
anyone in the crowd seem to mind. 
The most important development 


With this feat, Feller, who also! 
has pitched six one-hitters, joined 
aae Vander wend of the Reds 
as the only two still-acti itch- 
was to follow. Would Keller, ever ors who Mine hurled eg nee 
dangerous, play the role Ofiters Vander Meer made his in 
— He —- ov but not be-| successive outings against the 
cause he wasn’ ng. Braves 2nd Dodgers in 1938. 

The first pitch to King Kong se 


was called a’strike. He swung ce 
viciously, vehemently, at the sec- Since Ed Head of the Dodgers 


came through with a no-hitter a 
ond, but hit nothing. Now Feller! week ago yesterday, one wag was 


was only one strike away from! prom ted to remark that “it looks |/** 
his goal. No one had long to waitliike the pitchers are ahead of the|wi%s 
before it was all over. For Keller, | nitters.” 
getting only a piece of the ball, 

as did all the Yanks through-| As if the tension were not High 
out the history-making afternoon,/enough, Ken Keltner muffed an 
bounced meekly to Ray Mack Atieasy foul fly hoisted by Phil Riz- 
second, The latter fielded the balliguto with two out in the eighth. 
cleanly, eastly, flipped to Fleming|With this life, the Scooter might 
for thn putout at first, and that/have proved troublesome, but Bou-| "um Deted York. DiMaggio. 4% his 1941 fight with Conn, 
was that. dreau threw him out on a magnifi-|tome run Doett Becrifice-Newhowser Lett oo| “I'm not worried about MYisnappy brown leenae 8 

Immediately Feller was besieged cent play from deep short. j|basee——Detroit 6. Boston 6. Bases on balle——Off . - 


‘= innings, but was driven out of the/Kari, o... 
|box in the sixth, when St. Louis! +.) 
|scored five runs. The Browns also 
ichased Lum Harris with three in 
the eighth. 
Sam Chapman hit his third home 
run of the year in the third inning.) 
The Athletics picked up their final) Two-nase bie — MeCormick. Cotman 
tallies off Steve Sundra. | Spetee Seco Neer Te . Gen, Gupte On 


lnlave-- Colman and Con: Con, Gustine and ¢ an 
The box score: SLeft on bases——Philedelphia 4, Pittsburgh 9 Rases 
ST. LOUIS (A.) 


an balle- Off Gables 7 wthese 3. Kart 1 Mal 
PHILADELCHIA (A.) |iett 1. Struck out—Hy T. Myzhes 2. Gables 

% abd.r.h.po.a.e.| Hallett 1. Hite-—Off Gables 4 fn T inning 
21260611 m2. T Hughes f in 7. Kari @ yt Ww 
6! piveher —Maliett. Losing oltcher—T Alughes 
@) nires—MHentine, Conlen and Boagess Time 
O| game—1:51. Attendance—4,970 
o 
” 


*| ADAMS ARRIVES IN MEXICO 


‘Claims More Giants Will Join 
Him in Mexican League 


He walked in the second inning, 
advanced to third on Dom DiMag- 
gio's two-bagger to right center 
and romped home on Newhouser’s 
wild heave. After Leon Culberson 
had singled in the third inning, 
|\Newhouser passed Ted Williams 
jand both counted on York's double 
ito right center. 
The box score: 
DETROIT (A) 


Hallett. o 
115112 


~- 


Total 
aan for Galkeld th seventh 
bRatted for (lables in serenth 
eRetted for Richardson in ninth 

Philadelphia .@an 
Pit'eburch aes 
Runs batted tn—Northey, Gienfridde, Bt 


ae 208 
saat 





’ 





Weehingten 6 Bevee om 6 
“carberough 1 Riruck 
»—Loost. Uwmptres—Berry. 2 

res, Time @f geme—i 504, Attend 


~ 7 
a Hallet 
> 
m 


et 2b Pips 


zb 


Pesky, «4... : ' 
Williams if 


' -——-_— 
Zarilla if 
jCh'st'n, 3 


ADVERTISEMENT 


Indian Invasion 
In the Bronx! 


Greenb’g,1lb 
Wakef'ld, | 
Mullin, rf 
Higains, 3d 
Richards, 
Newh ser, 


) 
pe 
i6 
13 
4‘°@ 
6°06 
41 
306 
21 
9°06 
il |} Christ herp 2 y 
5 | Herris. op 

ioore, OD 


eeuseneo~coe 


S22 Oe — wre 18% 


3 
? 
5 
22 
2 
I 
Total 


Detrott ....« 
Hortan ei3 


Rune batted in-—York 2, Doerr. 


p ie a7 126 


> 





| Total 3412 F 
MEXICO CITY, April 30 (®» 

Ace Adams, former New York 
Giant pitcher who told friends he 
would get $10,000 a year to play 





b 
3 
> 
| 1 


s 
5 
5 
0 
3 
i 
i 
5 
‘ 
1 
1 
6 
1 
O) 
> 
x] 
0 


Se > > 8 SC-Ouwnwow On ooo” 
Se 2 Fe SOO s +>. ower owns 


Ses °~200-o-+0.. onsoo-* 


s 
: 
0 
2 
0 
6 
0 
I 
t) 
0 
0 
6 
0 
1 
Ui] 
0 
i) 
' 
a 
a 
0 
7 


5S wl oss %sa09S8e000e60re0---" 


ene 
" 





American League 
Gillette to Sponsor Television 








first of credited 

as well as for his game-winning day, and other Yankees have been 

homer. For himself, Bob said he|contacted by Pasquel interests, but| Philadelphia 12, St. Louis 8. 
had good stuff, better stuff than|that none of his charges had seen 
won for him in 1940. He praised'fit to do business with them. 
Boudreau for his great play on| 

the ball Stirnweiss hit through the| Buddy Hassett, veteran first- 
middie in the first inning, when|baseman, was released by the 
Boudreau, crossing second, fielded) yankees unconditionally. 


STANDING OF THE CLUBS 


—— 


od ight ything,” sports ensemble. 's 
\s » my we or an ng, , . , 
by his mates and by the fans from Newhouser 3, Dobson 3. Struck out—By New-| SPO y g &. | However, the beaver was due to be 
Hol'g th, p 
Rigzuto, before the game, r@- Time of game—1:56. Attendance—18,877 ; Le in the Mexican League, arrived. 
enter the clubhouse, where writers ag ge my bRatted for Sundra in eighth 
tractive offer from the Mexican ood sing to Mexico. 
|State Athletic Commission offices) Pnitadeiphis 402 201 12 
dreau gave orders that no one wasiident Larry MacPhail said he and 
| rardine, Zerille 2. Judmich, Stevens | jean League scout, and Gerar-| 
iphysical examinations. Conn has), Tredste bite MeQuinn \wgrery sd 
of experts rushed in to congratu-|ceive a raise because of the threat been training at Greenwood Lake, | fices—Peck. Hall. Harris. Double plays—Kell, Mall 
Y ] I jhalle Off Mhirtey 4. LaMerehia 1. Christepher 2 quel. 
was as great as the one he hasibefore the season. His 1942 GI | Nationa — wher hate | 
|lingeworth |. Hite-—€ff @hiriey @ tn 1/3 inoing | along wit Adams, also was sched- 
\Cleveland 1, New York 0, Louis-Conn fight have been ob-/ Bes © In 12/3. Hollingsworth 0 in 1. Passed 
wet grounds. 
| ; ling Company and the Gillette) \4 "sires Time of same—2i18 Attend.|8¢¢, Fla., and would come here 
| 
Pittsburgh 4, Philadelphia 1. jacobs, J. P. Spang, Jr., president| 
AMERICAN LEAGUE 
—— American League 
STANDING OF THE CLUBS | television. The event will be Keller, New York 
PiMaggic 


b Finney 
lhouser 9, Dob 9. Wild pitch—Newhouser, tm-|Louig said. “I lan to carry the 
every side. Bob made his way to . is. ‘ ’ 4 7, jnere Tees Of G8eR OG Re could aul 
Tota aeir? 
vealed that he had been ap-| : : ~ here today and declared “some! 
Both the champion and chal- n 
and photographers were at the ° | Batted for Finney in eighth 
: ' dams made the trip by plane,| | 
Major League Baseball] |jsitis stieis’committion secs Futiina ssi 8 88 $91 82 ot A gam p by P 
to enter for five minutes. Then,/Rizeuto had been in conference on CRepmon 
n pie Peat, Seert:|do and Alfonso Pasquel, brothers| 
late and to interrogate the hero,/from Mexico. “Rizzuto will receive N. J and MeQuinn; Walleess, Hall and MrQuinn. Lett 
| Waris 1, Mellingeworth 1. Struck eut-—Bg Clerts Harry Feldman, another pitcher 
compiled on the diamond. ve ee # unfair,” MacPhail de- YESTERDAY'S RESULTS otal " 
y h “ 4 Lablarchia S$ in 27/3, Kinder 6 tn 2 undre 5 
| uled to arrive but Adama said his 
Feller, all, MacPhail disclosed that Stirn-| poston 4, Detroit 0. hell-—-Menruse, Winning piteher —Christooher. | 
Ohi 2, Brook! 1 
nteage — Safety Razor Company, it was an- jnext week. 
, . 
Today's Probable Pitchers 
Boston at Cincinnati, rain.jof Gillette, and John F. Royal,| 
broadcast over television station) Cleveland at New York—Reyn-|Wemer, Boston 
on 


Dillinger . 
pires—Paparelia, Weefer, Summers and Grieve, 
\fight all the way and if I have , 
the dugout and was the first to & y make his first visit to a barber in : i 
afatted for miler sfeth j 
proached by and received an at- more Giants” soon would be com-| 
door, awaiting his arrival. Bou-|League. He turned it down. Pres-| efi te gl x rile ed eos ees 
2 : allees urede rs.) ompanted b Robert Jenia,| 
lcontracta and receive preliminary | a. BS lene bo 7 
when the time was up, @ swarm|Monday and that Phil did not re-| 
‘ Home run—Chaoman. Stolen pase-—Peck. Sacri- 
Wednesday, May 1, 1946 of League President Jorge Pas-| 
whose war record with the Navy|a bonus, but he was promised that valle Ot hivley . LaMenchia t. Chetstagher 3 
LaMerehia | 2. Reese 1 who jum the New York club] 
Gives Credit to Hayes clared. YESTERDAY'S RESULTS - York at St. Lest Exclusive television rights to the! io). christooher @ in 623. Martie 8 te 12/8 
i\New York a . ils, 4 
Hayes for a perfectly caught game ij tstandi t third t tained by the National Broadcast-~|ing pitener — @hiriey. Umpires—MeGewan, Rue! teammate stopped off at Tallahas | 
) (| weiss, outstanding a rd yester- . 
Washington 8, Chicago 2. 
(ll innings). . - “ 
nounced yesterday by Promoter . 
2 | | Major League Leaders 
By The Associated Press 
\NBC vice president in charge of) 
|WNBT, which returns to the air/Olds (1-1) vs. Ruffing (0-0), D *mMagaie, ‘Boeton | 


3 
i 
, their Broaz Bombers! 
9. Detroit at Boston—Benton (1-1) | Pesky, 3 —— 


the ball and threw out Snufty,| 
even while falling flat on his face. 

Someone reminded Feller about 
the deprecatory remarks and ru- 
mors that had floated in from the 
hinterlands concerning his slowing 
down. “Look,” Feller said, appar- 
ently perturbed, “when the time 
comes that I don't have it, I'll be 
the first to know about it.” 

Over in the Yankee dressing 
room all was quiet, as it naturally 


would be. DiMaggio summed it up| 


best when he said: “Feller was as 
great as he's ever been. He de- 
served the no-hitter.” 

How great Bob was may be 
gleaned from the fact that he 


|\Charley (Red) Ruffing, late in re- 
porting, is ready to go and Joe 
McCarthy will send him aga‘nst 
Allie Reynolds today. . . The 
last time the Yankees were the) 
victims of a no-hitter was in 1919, | Detroit ...00000--:) 
when Ray Caldwell, also of the In-| Sieyslan¢. 
dians, blanked them. . . . Inciden-|Chicage 
jtally, yesterday's shut-out was the! 
ifirst suffered by the McCarthy- 


jmen this season. 
GAMES TODAY 


When Fleming erred in the ninth,/Cleveland at New York 
ithe fans were apprised of the rul-| (2:39 Pp, M.) 

ling over the public address system ’ 3 

This was the first time such an Detroit at Boston. 
announcement had been made at) 
the Stadium. 


Sa 


}3 
1} 6 6) 





Seewuvuuw 


| | eer er ment wm! 
7 


Philedeiphis .....' 
Lest. 





Chicago at Washington. 


St. Louls at Philadelphia. | 


RiilT 
Lit 


oF fF 


i ij 
iif 
Ei 
pappetions _—— 


= 


} 


i 

- e@~~—c ecw) 
4\—ee eveoe 
~~ e@- Suveouw 
=» © #e-ceow 
| | wow Oe 


4 
~! —-ee eee 


r 


|New York at St. Louis, 


Brooklyn at Chicago. 


Philadelphia at Pittsburgh. 


Boston at Cincinnati. 


aa Twentieth Century Sporting Club) 
ririry 
Wl door parks in the New York area! 


417\ from 
| 285 
1s? 


on May , 
| NBC and Gillette also have ac-|“5. Ferriss (1-0). 
quired television rights to all; Chicago at Washington — Lee 


other fights promoted by the| (9-1) vs. Haefner (0-0). 
St. Louis at Philadelphia—Pot- 
t Madison Square Garden and out-|*er (2-1) vs. Fowler (0-2), 
National League 
New York at St. Louis—-Koslo 


(0-1) vs. Martin (1-0) or Brecheen 
(1-2). 


June, 1946, to June, 1947 

The three organizations have been 

jcooperating since September, 1944. 

Five cameras will be used to) '") k ae 

Rup the fight, three of them (1 iy A (0-0, hire 

equipped with the super-sensitive| ‘*, . ph, 

RCA abe Orthicon. The event|, Philadelphia at Pittsburgh— 

will be broadcast to Washington on\U@4 (1-1) ve. Albosta (0-1). 

a closed circuit for the benefit ot Boston at Cincinnati—Lee (2-0) 

a selected group of Government|“*: Gumbert (0-0). 

officials. Figures in parentheses indicate season's won- 
and-lost records 


| NATIONAL 
| Wietelmann, Boston ® 
| Herman, Brooklyn 
Musial, St. Louis 
| Witek, New York 8 | 
Reiser, Brooklyn 2 

RUNS BATTED IN 

AMERICAN LEAGUE 
|Deerr, Boston 17 , Spence, Wash 
Etten, New York. 12 

NATIONAL LEACUE 
Stevens, Brookiyn...12 | Musial, St 
Miller, Cincinnati. 12 
| HOME-RUN HITTERS 
AMERICAN LEAGUE 
J. DiMaggio, MN. ¥...44 York. Boston 
Chapman. Phila 3 | Pellagrini, Boston 
|Etten. New York ..2 | Keltner, Cleve 
Lindell, New York...3 
NATIONAL LEAGUE 
|Walker, Brookiyn....3 , Miller, Cincinnat! 
|Witek, "New York 2| Kiner’ Pittsburgh 
Holmes. Boston 2 |} Hatton, Cincinnati 
Northey, Phila 2 


, 
el 


Louls 1} 


“17 
yan 
370 


s70 
a4 


12 


Today 2:30 p. m. 


YANKEES vs. CLEVE. 


YANKEE STADIUM 
HOME OF AMERICA’S FINEST BASEBALL 


a) oOON THEAIR 


Play-by-play broedcast 
WINS-1010 “Lic 


By White Owl Cigars 





RIPPEY’S LATE RUSH | 


TAKES DERBY TRIAL 


Helis’ 14-5 Chance Outraces 
Favored Spy Song by Neck 
in Mud at Louisville 


WITH PLEASURE IS THIRD 


Assault, Eastern Hope, Fourth 
in $13,400 Mile Fixture 
Before 18,000 Fans 


By JAMES ROACH 
Special .o Tus New Yorx Times 

LOUISVILLE, Ky., April 30— 
It's not news to William Helis, New 
Orleans sportsmen, but he has a 
game, solid Kentucky Derby colt 
who doesn't mind slippery going. 
Today at old Churchill Downs his 
Rippey, a son of Pompey, fought it 
gut over the mile route with 
Charles T. Fisher's Spy Song and 
dyew away in the last fifteen yards 
to win by a neck the ninth Derby 
Trial Stakes. 

Ten went to the post in this last 
preliminary to Saturday's $100,000 
fidded gallop, but it turned out to 
ke a two-horse race. Rippey and 
Spy Song, with the latter on top 
into the stretch, were off by them- 
sgives virtually all of the journey, 
and the others, spattered with mud 
fling up from the gooey track, 
were never in it. 

The Brolite Farm's With Pleas- 
ure, a 40-to-1 shot under colors 
for the first time this year, was 
third, four lengths behind Spy 
Sof, and a neck in front of fourth- 
place Assault, ay Ranch pride, 
who ia the East's No. 1 hope for 

ult, winner of the Wood 


the D@by. 
Memorial and the six-furlong Ex- 


perimental at Jamaica, had all of} 
eight lengths over the closest of! 
A. C. Ernat's Ala-| 


is pursuers, 
,0nd, That gives a general idea 
of what the rest of the field did— 
or failed to do. 


Marine Victory Sixth 


Robert Bruce Livie’s Marine Vic- 
tory was a rather dismal sixth. 
After him came Calumet's In 
Earnest, J. Graham Brown's Dou- 
ble Slam, R. 3. McLaughlin's Wee 
Admiral and-—dead last—Hal Price 

eadley's Menever, 

Rippey, out for only the third 
time since he started going to the 
races, was made l14-to-5 second 
choice to Spy Song by the crowd 


of 18.000. He earned $9,775 of the |kscois 


$13,400 gross. 

The Helis colt carried 110 pounds 

to Spy Song’s 118 and he raced 
home in 1:401-5, slowest time in 
the history of the event. That, of 
course, was chiefly because rain 
during the night, added to what 
had fallen the previous day, didn't 
make for rapid romping. 

The break in the Rippey-Spy 
Bong duel came in the last leaps 
to pay-off territory. They were a 
two-horse team down the stretch, 
Spy Song on the inside and Johnny 


Longden drawing on his years of | ion 


experience in the saddie to get 
every last ounce of run of of him. 

Suddenly, with yards to go, Spy 
Song threw up his head—and it 
was all over. On went Rippey, 
with Ferril Zufelt holding his whip 
still while Longden banged away, 
to win and become a leading con- 
tender for Saturday's race, What 
he will do against the Maine 
Chance fliers is anybody's guess, 
but they’re talking plenty about 
him tonight. 

This was the second success in 
two days here for Helis and the 
trainer of his Western string, E. L. 
Snyder. 


Mist o’Gold Withdrawn 


Aside from the Trial, big news) 
of Derby doings was of a negative) 
nature. Mrs. Vera S. Bragg’s Mist 
o’Gold, fast-finishing fourth in the) 
Wood Memorial, was declared out! 


when he ran a temperature of 104) 
this morning. After a pow-wow 
with a veterinarian and Thomas 
Bragg, husband of the owner, 
trainer Big Jim Healy said Mist 
o'Gold would be kept in the barn 
rather than risk ruining the colt 
for the rest of the year. Mist 
o’'Gold was to have raced in the 
Trial, but was scratched along 
with Heres How, lone filly named; 
Dark Jungle and Ariel Ace. 


Maine Chance Farm's Lord Bos- 
well was out for a brief airing in 
the morning and breezed three fur-| 
longs in 0:38 3-5. Knockdown, the) 
big boy's stablemate, is expected) 
to work out tomorrow morning. 
Another out in the mud was Dave) 
Ferguson's Bob Murphy, who went 
@ mile and an eighth in 2:02 3-5. 


Post time for the big number 
Saturday is 6:15 P. M., “Eastern 
Daylight Saving Time. Columbia) 
(WABC) will do the broadcasting) 
between 6 and 6:30. 


| 
The summaries (7: 
FIRST RACE—Purse $1,800; special weights: 
maiden 2-year-olds; four and a half furlongs | 
Bob's Birthday, 118 (Zufelt) 660 340 3 40) 
Mr. RR. &.. 118 (Campbell) 3 5 
Diavolo Chief, 118 _. (Molbert) 4.00 
Time—0:55 1/5. Trace Ace, Black Warbier| 
and Campagnas Cal also ran 
SECOND RACE-—Purse $1,800; claiming; 3- 
year-olds; six furiongs 
Stier Bright, 106 (Hanke) 30.80 11.20 7.80) 
Toleca, 106 .. (Scurlock) 13.60 620) 
Dental Chair, 106 .(Truschka) 66 
Time—1:18. Lawyer Larry, Old Bet, Jeanree, 
low Bird, Pat Hand, Anuhe, Cideams Bro 
and Bryce also ran 
THIRD RACE—Purse $1,800: claiming: >| 
r-olds; four and « half fur 
eel Player. 100.. (Wallace) 16.40 5.00 3.00) 
Merry Mary, 107 _(T ka) 
Tranquil Tide, 108 (Hust) 3.00) 
Time-0:56. Kindly Miss. Arabs Fancy, Ma- 
vada and Wasp Waist also ran | 
FOURTH RACE—Purse $2,000; allowances; 3-/ 
year-olds; six furlongs } 
First Page, 116 (Layton) $60 240 2.20 
Spirsilia, 105 . (Padgett) 280 24 
Dicks Gal, 108 (Truschka) 20) 
Time—1:15 1/5. Pene and Philip Queen also) 
ran 
FIFTH RACE—The Derby Trial; 
added; 3-year-olds; one mile 
Ripper. 110 (Zufelt) 
Spy Song, 118 (Longden) 
ith Pleasure, 118 .. (Wahler) 
Time—1:40 1/5. Marine Victory. Doubie Siam 
Assault, Menever, In Earnest, Wee Admirai 
Alamond also ran 
SIXTH RACE—Purse $2,000: allowances; 4- 
year-olds and upward; six furlongs 
Son Forever, 113..(Hartwick) 680 240 2.4 
Errard, 110 ; (Wa ) 20 220 
Bolo Prince, 110 (Scurlock) 3.00 
Time—1:15. Fishers Pet, Walters Boy, Leorey 
and a Peak also ran 
SEVENTH RACE—Purse $1,800; maidens; spe- | 
cial weights: 3-year-olds; six furlongs 
Lazy Shoes, 116 (Brooks) 620 420 2.60 
War Pippin, 116 (Batley) 480 3.00) 
Billy Perry, 111 (Truschka) 3.00) 
Time—1:163.5. Patter. Castle Heights, Look 
out Club, Teddy's Vixen, Martha vie, Lux- 
embourg, Ray. Rolls Cup ané Fly Menow also 
ran 
EIGHTH RACE—Purse $2,000: claiming: 
year-olds and upward: one mile and «a 


ong 
Charen, 106 (Wallece) 37 60 13.90 
More Stings. 104 (Scuriock) 10 6 
Theat a Lady. 104 (Padgett) 
Ty 20045. Touch of Time. Prince Go- 
vans. Mackaby, Iceango and Donafel also ran 
Track muddy 


700 4.20 3.60) 
3.80 3.60) 


‘| 
fur- 
5.40) 


6.40) 
3.60) 





é 


|aNayr 


Tourist P 
[siete 


| oso 


Don's Count, 113 


00 40 | 
3 2 in 


purse $10,000 | ol 


SPORTS 


COMING DOWN TO A PHOTO FINIS 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


H IN DERBY TRIAL STAKES 


ae ae 
— 


a ’ pt 
. ad 4 PN ye. 


mile test at Churchill Downs. 


Pimlico Resalts 


BALTIMORE, MD. 


FIRST Rach -Purse 42800 catming: 


olds and upward; one mile and « 
Rare Fieres, 112 ... (Mora) 18.50 690 
Lucky Change, 112....(Dillon) 6.70 
Big Jack, 132 (Covalll) 

Fime—i 564-5. River Bank. Caffeine, 
terprising. 


4-year- 
long 
6.70 
5.0 
3.0 
En- 
Rollin Water, Williwin, Rough 
Amos, Infinite Girl and La Cacice also ran 
SECOND RACE—Purse $2,500; maidens; special 
weights; 4-year-olds and upward; six fur- 


—yr 

Tap Lightly, 122 (Kirk) 56.20 350 23.00 
Fannie Mac, i1T (Snider) 

Balu Empress, 113.. (Walters) 

Time—1:16. Miss Ditty, eGeilant Doc, Golden 
Risk, Buckie Time, Army Plume, aSiiver Sting. 
Roll Kleven, French Ward and Town Camp also 
ran 

aSmith and Mutusky entry 

_ Somute (Rare es and Tap Lightly) 

4 
art RACE—Puree $3,500; allowances 
steeplechase; 4-year-olds and upward; about 
two miles 


Rouge Dragon, 153. .(Leonard). 17.70 
Soldier Song, 152 (Miller) 
Delhi Dan, 143 (F. D. Adams) 

Time—3:51. Bill Coffman, Navigate, Kenne- 
bunk, Liewt. Well, Refugio, Adaptable and 
Kittiwake also ran 
FOURTH RACE—Purse $2,500; allowances; 2- 

year-olds; four and a half furlongs 
With Monor, 112 (Walters) 6890 430 280 
Manchac, 1230 .(Sneliings) 70 410 
Coral Star, Li? (Gilbert) 2% 

Time—0: 84 1-5 Chally Maliy, Peck’s Choice, 
Oberod, Enon and Dona's Ace also ran 
FIFTH RACE—Purse £63,500; allowances; 4 

year-olds and upward; one mile and « six- 


teenth 
Service Pilot, 124.(Scawthorn) 620 590 480 
Cal's Pet. 119 (Combest) -. 15.10 10.40 
Fiange, 112 (Clark) 13.90 
Time—1:4. Gorget, Mister Chat, Priend or 
Foe, aSplit the Wind, Alfios and aSandy Try 
also ran 
aT oro te 4 
SIXTH RACE— 
ents: 


Sea 
funheilo, 


(Quattiebeum) 
Lovemenow. 
Time —1:13 


1722 (Snider) 
2-5. 
also ran 


'' Prognosis ané Blue Dream 
SEVENTH RACE—Purse $2,500: claiming: 


entry 


¢ Rennert Handicap; $5,000 


+ 
year-olds and @pward; one mile and « six- 
teenth 


(More) 1060 448 3.10 
3 


relian, Hayfielés Mora. Bugler, Craz 
Ex . ~ and Golden Babe « 
Er CE—Purse $3,500: claiming; 4- 


r-olde and upward; one mile and a fur- 


Z 
Marquest, 118 (Quattlebaum) 42.70 1160 7.46 
Omaha Mike, 122 SJemas) .. 40 3.40 
— Uni, 11) (Delara) 650 

me—1'562-5. Felt Hat, Dr. Johnson. Peace 
Fieet, Hacel's Play, Shove Off. Subdue. Fourth 
agers, od pom and Floredna also ren 

ra as 


Pimlico Entries 
BALTIMORE; MD. 
By The Associated Prees 


FIRST RACKE—Purse $2,500: maidens: special 
weights; 2-year-olds; four and ome-half fur- 


as 
Trenic -eeess120 | Movable Type ... 
Mint O'Morn .....120 | aTappahannock .. 
Raconteur . 120 | Royal Governor . 


aDark Pass 120 | War Glance 


Wilmar 120 | golem Bull 
120 ' Big Buster 


Slower 
a Chenery entry 
SECOND RACE—Purse $2,500 
year olds and upward, six furlongs (chute) 
me Bomb ......°110 ja a ones 
Ne Quota 122 | Tee ee 
Erato 
Dark Danger 
Simetrica 
Orenco 
Dont Delay 
aRed Blossoms 
aBosiey and Kirkpatrick entry; DWaple and 
Schorsch entry 
THIRD RACE—Purse $3,300: claiming; steeple- 
Chase; 4-year-olds and upward; about two 


miles 
138 | Little Sammie .... 
1196 | bFieldfare 1 
bAbidale 143 | Or, 


Rice Cake . 1135 ' aStrolling On 
aBleber and Black entry; bObre and Bosley 
entry 
FOURTH RACE—Purse $3,000; allowances; 3- 
qe olds; six furlongs (chute), 
ough Cloud . 
Wary Flight 
Hawkw Aress . 
eania | 
Arden Lad 14) 
ride 1M! 
RACE—Purse $3. 
six furlongs (chute) 
1 The Shaker 
.. 117 | Flying Level .. 
*104 | Tellmehow 
117 | Ceder Brand 
“14 | Shivaree 
117 ' Rollino 


7 * 
. . "5 
claiming 


Tennessee Maid . 
bMend "1 
Flying Moose ... 
Good Nite 


Straw Ride 


year-olds 
Crazy Whirl sede 
Par Pius 
Curfew Giri . 
Tacaro Briar . 
—— bbe 

yin en 
goer R 
added: 3-year-olds and 
(chute). 

eeese 190 


aMarcia P. ...... 110 
Panacea cocoon 


ther 
six furlongs 


‘Tedious Miss ..... 
Cherry Ese -» Alo 
e Night Strike -. 108 
Royal Flush li7 wees aoe! 
aGoldsborough and Kendrich gamer. 
SEVENTH RACE—Purse $2.500; claiming; 3- 
ear-olds: one mile and « sixteenth 
doun Boy 116; Mt. Airy 

Little Push ...°98 | Darlin 
Equa Krona ...*106 | Bur 
Grend Fiash .....*111 | Gica 
Sorrowful 109 | Foxler 
Mibdill D *108 | Foreigner 

EIGHTH RACE—Purse 82.500: claiming; 4- 
year-olds and upward; one mile and « six- 


teenth 
Pontchartrain .....115 | Clifton’s Comet . 
Sungino 115 | Lord Hatran 
Ole’s Gal “107 | Tacaro Identy . 
Capt. America 110 | Bully Gusher 

° “a White Ford 
1 


John Hunnicutt 
Knight Time Charming Hero . 
..115 | Jimmie’s Aide 


Through Train .. 
Liberty Head 115 ' Beanstalk 
“Five pounds apprentice allowance claimed 
Seven pounds apprentice allowance claimed. 
tTen pounds apprentice allowance claimed. 


Grace . 


Narragansett Park Results 


PAWTUCKET, &. I. 
By The Associated Press 


FIRST RACE—Purse 33.400; allowances; 4- 
year-olds and upward; one mile and « six- 


teenth 

Tracelette, 113 (Snyder) 630 360 3.20 
ane) 
(Dattilo) 


Esta, 105 
Abbots Maid. 106 
Time—1:53 1/5. The General, Enid O., Cale- 
8 Neck, Fiery Ruler, Neotrist, Hefti 
Harris @ Cute Eye aiso ran 
SECOND RACE—Purse $2,300; claiming: 4- 
year-olds and upward: six ip | (chute) 
(Keiper) 33.60 18.20 10.40 
Broadway Jim, 113 (Bracciale) 20.80 11.60 
Maeline, 113 (Brennan) 

Time—1:16 4/5. Vaildina Irene, Mighty Tough 
Shaste KO. Saratoga Polly, Outside ir, 
Herold, Old Whitey, Morgils Lad and Don 
Listo also ren. 

Daily double (Tracelette and Don's Count) 

id $150 60 


1 
*2-year-olds; five 
Samba Siren, 115.... 
Malomer, 114 ........ 
Dreaming, 106 

Time—1: , 

Toot, Creole Babe, Eterna! Gold, Jaynie 
R. Simiss, Ersie Jones and Aces Up aiso ran 
FOURTH RA 
Bee W. Bee. 

Valdina Greedy, 112. (Maschek) 


Sir Kid. 115 (Nash) 
Time—1:16 1/5. Glorious Sec, Reeves. 


(Seabo) 17.80 8.40 4 
Lynch) .... 1.80 Ht - 


“ Out Front, Lassagria, Patch Buck. Sunset 7. 


Kee and Mattie Sue also ran 


eat 
$2,500. claiming: 4-year- 


IFTH RACE—Purse 


Sangone, 111 
Phanatam, 113... 
Kathy. 


1 cage Gf ’ 
Time—1:15 4/5. Pretty er, 


wy Chartte, 110 
1° Agnes, nee ( Tobt 
aqgarten .» 118.. 
Fi abo Pi Re =~ 
re quant, « 
Ace and Broke Even aiso ran. 
aJ. and A. Beattie entry 
RACE— $3,000; 
year-olds and upward. six 
Air Patrol, 113 (Breen) 4.20 3 
Zacabrand. 110 (Brennan) 
Aboyne, 1i4 (Nash) 
Time—1:14 1/5. Henry Pa , 
For Granted. Post War 


Craft also ran 

EIGHTH RA se $2,500: allowances; 4- 
— a upward; one mile and « six- 
een 

Gunfiash, iss es (Seabo) 6.40 468 3.80 

Ho Hum, 1 a (Turnbull) oo 7.80 

Darby Donsaa. fi (Andino) 

Time—i:50 1/5. Chance Cross. Taxi King 
~ Reward and Wise Timmie also ran 
ac 


slow. 


+4 Sirde 


- ~~ Gwhere—1, Sunshine Stable; 7, Mrs. a7 1 “Rice: 5, Greentree Stable; 4 B. Howe pes 


05 | 1:48 1/5 





ACE—The Carroll Handicap: 85.000) Roig Dan 
upward. 


RACK—Purse $2,400; claiming; maidens. Red 
80 


.| Western Prince ...111 


700| 1 ne 


Pees 


Rippey (8), pone by William Helis, speeding on to defeat Charles T. Fisher's Spy Song (4) in the one- 


Associated Preas Wirephote 


JAMAICA RACING CHART 


By The Associated Press 
Tuesday, April 30. Twenty-first day, Weather clear, track fast. 


FIRST RACE—Purse $3,500: (claiming price $5,000); 4-year-olds and upward: six fur- 
longs. Start good: won driving; eS same. Went to post 1:30, off 1:31 Winner, dk 
db. g.. 5. by Hygro—Liberqueen, by Liberty Limited Trainer, W. F. McClain. Time—1:13 

,-—Mutuels—. Dollar 
as 4 _ Str. Fin Jockeys St Pi. Sh. Odds. 

im” 1m ied ia OD Jessop. 19.50 8.90 

‘hi ys 64 «=Miller co ccce OD 
De 3™@ aArcaro 

a“ 4% 

st 5! 

6' ii 

~* 7 

7™ ae 

s oe 

10 


Starters 


Starters. wt. PP. st 
Butch Raider .... 


al 
4 
> 
ST 
al 


ee 
~ 
- 


ete ® ~eewoe 
ss 


3™% 
““ 


oy 
sh, 
7 
ae 
10 


ot ee} 
Sasesecs 


Sreee-—-waw 
aw 


~ 


“Steve, American Wolf 
. K. Murchison; 2, Mrs. W. A. Kelley; 3. EB. Strauss: 4, J. C_ Vidal; 
Forestiere; 6, Twin Oaks Farm; 7, Mrs. P. Bieber, 6, L. De Latour; 9, I. Bieber; 


—— 


rx | 


one mile and a sixteenth. Start 

2:03. Winner, ch. ¢, 3, by Caruso— 
Time—1. 47% itis 

Mu 

Fin, Jockeys. . 

soe 1.20 


= 


goes. won easily; place driving. Went to post 
rpment volo. Trainer, G. FP. Odom 


ae Se 

iz : Six at by ~ 
ss 

4 
iad 
Helen's Girt 7 
Sip O° Tea __......108 3 1 iH 

t Kid Ca 

perl wan ey Stable: 3. T. MH. Meard Jr.; 
S.Arrow Stable; 6 EK. Sands: 7, Glenwood Farms: 8 Domino Stabie ; 

THIRD RACE—The Thistle; purse $4,000; fillies, 3-year-olds; Class D, six fu 
: Gr easily. Went to post 2:35. off at once. Winner, or f., 

Time. Tr P. Burch. Time—1 12 ; 


| 


z 


j 


4 


$37 
333° 
: 


“ 
se 
: 
“ 

™ 


weer anres 
iSS2nsse8 


4, B. Pomeroy; 


, 


we.ePP. st. %& % Str. Fin ae) 
: 2 iy 1! iy iy DB. Jessop. 

27) 6 3* «=O Guerin ee oe 
sue »” James sesee 0 
7 4® MeCreary ...+ « 
o Woodhouse .. 
es Wilson 
a 


Fe eeeww 


Owners—i, D. Howe; 3. F. Frankel. 3, Lester Manor Stable; 
: ee diem: On. Fiana mn Ae 


be A ' Anapet, Siebie; 5, 


ive furlongs. 
0s, 


Start good: won 
A : . ; 2-year- ° : 
; . Went to post 308" oft 3:10. Winner edon—Orissa by 


‘ Str. 


, —Mutuels—. ar 

Fin. Jockeys. St Pi __ Sh Odds. 

“yb. jesop.. 6 C6 306 316 

* McCreary + eee 688 3.00 3.75 
Manford ....« 


James . on cas 


rs EE D. thalfers 7, ¥ Frankel” 5, Short 
Stable; 6. V. S. Brags 
[SSE =. 
; S-year-olds and upward; six furlongs, Start 
t 3:43; off at once. Winner, Bb. g, 4, by 
__ Rosen. Time—1: 10% dl ws 
7~—Mutuelo— Boller 

Str. Fin. Jockeys . 


"Givens 
James 


; ly; 2 Thy Rent o 
Seca weista—Poiyeta by Polydor.” Trainer J. B 


Starters. 
Buclus 


Arearo 


Coincidence see 
J.D. Jessop 


True North ‘ 


% i ‘ 


prices §5.000 to $4,000 maiden, S-year-olds, one 
riving; place easily. Went to post 4:15, off 4:16 

Trainer, C. V. Reynolds, 

—Mutvels— Boilar 
Pi. Sh. Odds 


==GIXTH RACE—Purse 63.500. claiming 
mile and 4@ sixteenth. Start good; won 
Winner, b. g.. by King Cole-—On Kip, by On Watch. 


WiPr st 4&4 % % Str. Fin Jockeys St 
im” iM” Te” Luce sneer ee 
2 7 863° «James . eevee 
3% 3'%Givens ....... « 

4!) «648 =Donose . 

5! 5'\% Arcaro — aree 006d 
G® G4 Permane ..... cise os 
7 

a® 


Starters 
King Pretty 
Stan Tracy 
Ferry Command 
Contortionist . 
Cold Scotch . ‘ 
Ice + % aces 
Goose ther .... 
Rinarose ceeeen 
Flashing Home .... 
Hi JO-ADM «.cesss 
Diabililio . 

Owners—1, 
wits; 5. Mrs. T : 
®. W. Ziegler Jr: 10. G 11, K. Murchison 
=... eee = —— = = — — 2 

SEVENTH RACE—The Prospest; purse 85.000; 4-year-clds and upward, class D: one 
mile and «a sixteenth Start good; won driving, place same Went to dost 4:55. off 4 55% 
Winner, b. h., 6, by Firethorn-Crauneen by St. Germans. Trainer, W. O. Hicks, Time— 


1:48 4/8.” 


o 9 
7 103 #14 
ie: SES SS | Se | A 
ED. Jacobs: 3, Brandywine Stable: 4. Mrs. L. Rabino- 
; 6, H. A. Strasberg: 7, H. Bostwick; 6, EB. Koeppel; 


wePpPra.*%\, 4% % Str. Fin. Jockeys 
T% T8 ge 2'% 1° Arcaro 
6! pee 5 bd 2° Atkinson 
1* a “ 18 3*® Onorate . 
6 «' 4* Miller 
se 5% James siete 808 #008 
6* Woodhouse .. 
79 Kozycki 
s Hanford 
. Black Swen 
KE. Mulrenan; 3. J. M. Jerkens: 4. Belair Stud: 5G, 


. Schwarzheaupt; 2, Mre 
E. D. Levinson; 7, Mimosa Stock Farm; &. W. &. Jacobs 


Mutuels— Dollar 


St Pi 


Starters 
Pukka Gin.. 


Bulrush 
Crack Time ..... 


Ownere—1. 
Mrs. F. West; 6 


Narragansett Park Entries 


PAWTUOKET, &. 1. 
By The Associated Press 
FIRST RACE—Purse $2,500; claiming, 4 
year-olds and upward; one mile and « six- 


teenth a 
Easy Date 104 108 
.. "108 113 


. 107 il 
ll 


Jamaica Entries 


FIRST RACE Purse $4,000; maiden fillies 
2-year-olds: five furlongs 
aFascination 115, Lumpkin 
|Fiying Bimy -» 115 | Retgh Fleet 
|Appian Via 115 | aLerk 
/|Carid Bong 115 | aBy Sea *110 
Pair Cross 115 | Jane Sting 115 

a O. Phipps-Belair stud—Mrsa. W. Stone entry 

SECOND RACE—Purse $4,000: maiden fillies 
and mares; 3-year-olds and upward; six fur 


14 «OP'ghting Lady 14 
+ 114 | Last Tower i4 

114 | Dustabout 

iit Marys Dell on AM 


1g | Mary Lebey. oss... 114 
134 | Right Off 
1107 | Nayada 
|Prop Giri 4 
i a Mrs. W. FP. Stewart and Mra M. P. Row- 
land entry 
. | THIRD RACE — Purse $3,500: claiming: 4- 
ear-olds and upward: six furlongs. 
wrinson «+ aeeel lS | Wemite e+» 9107 
Raw Recruit 116 | Lady Apple *106 
108 | Fr jes Came lle 
113 | Wise Shot i171 
lie 
» is 


Sunspark ; 
Pompous Fox .... 
Pilot Light . 


Clarie Whiss ll 
econD RACE—Purse $2,208 Gots : «+ 
year-olds and upward; six furlongs ( ). 
t Editor ......112 ; Bonified +107 | Dia 
*105 | Dixie Bound 


Una H 

Mountain Air ..... 
Dissension Sir 
Ring Star 


Flaming High 
$2,500; claiming; 


~1 
1 


Crater Lake ; 
Texas Wonder. 


furlon, 
ll 
ut 
“112 


year-olds; five 
Chally’s Bid 
Sun Volo 
Mac Fetchit 
Wise Brunette 
Miss Piet 


Fond Wish 
Walkup 

; see Cue ‘ 
it oS 11a | Polittes 
bi | Red Corens ~ 1108 | Johnstown Boy 
FOUR RACE—Purse $2,500; claiming; 4- Michigan Smart ™ 115 | 

year-olds and upwerd; six furlongs (chute). 
Cebdemint 106 V 108 
Star Quest ..108 


20 $5,000 added: 4-year-olds and upward; one 
mile and a sixteenth 
aOatmeal : 123 

pegs Ma voee AMO 

Mono Miller 112 

al Bieber-Mrs, E. D. Jacobs entry 

FIFTH RACE—The Youthful Stakes: £10,000 

r-olds: five furlongs 

Marble Arch . 1b 

Eternal War 1A 
117 
ie & | 


purse $4,500; 
; 4-year-olds and upward, 


1M) Danada Red.......115 
. 115 | Decdonough ...... 115 
eT Larky Day ..“119 


115 
use 


aAyahs Boy 
Petrol Pomt 


Darby Duncan 
$5,000: allowances; 


x longs. 
7 Play Pretty’ Rae 
Countess Wise.... 
allowances; 4- Noview . 
and a six- | Forum ee ' 
SEVENTH RACE—Purse £3,500: claiming: 4- 
he fren and upward; one mile and a« six- 
een 


th 
1107 | Picket Line “113 


arified 
aWestern Front...flll | Liords » 1 
aAlport 117 


Wish thadagal 

Malachi ; Jim-Joe . 

oy om! 1M 
a Mrs. P. Bieber-Clinton Farm entry 
* Five pounds apprentice allowance claimed 
?Seven pounds apprentice allowance claimed 


$4 000. 
one mile 


Blue Whistler . 
110 


20 Romanicus 
Dansation Fy 
SEVENTH RACE—Purse $3,000; claiming: 4- 
year-olds and upward; six furlongs (chute). 
.. 120 | Hy-Gato 


upward; 
117 


112 
tll 


| Gulf Stream Remains Favorite 
NEWMARKET, England, April 

30 (4—Lord Derby's Gulf Stream 

ios |Temained a firm 2-to-1 favorite to- 

re day in the betting on tomorrow's 

’...! yos|Two Thousand Guineas race to be 
- Milrun over the Rowley Mile. The 
price on Khaled, the Aga Khan's 


a) allowance ciatmed. 
oe pon, coe . thoroughbred, was reduced from 
4 to 1 to 7 to 2. 


Miss Truman to See Derby ss RO 


WASHINGTON, April 30 ‘?—| Title Chess Match Saturda 
Miss Margaret Truman will be) Arnold 8. Denker of Forest 


Azimuth 
Executive 


‘}among the spectators at the Ken-|United States chess champion, will 


tucky Derby at Churchill Downs|ieave by plane tonight for Los 
Saturday, Mr. James Helm, White/Angeles, where, beginning Satur- 


House social secretary, said today.|/day, he will contest a match of ten | Camps 


President's daughter will es for the title with Herman 
travel to Louisville with Treasury|Steiner of Los Angeles, Pacific 
Secretary and Mrs. Fred Vinson. Coast and international expert. 
. . 
a 


*}at $94,905. 


# |$30,000 added Grey Lag Handicap) 


| St 


| Weiss and Miller 


“|before the Appellate Division of 


*|Chance Farm horse, before a win- 


FOURTH RACE — The Incetatus Handicap 


BUZFUZ, 9-10, FIRST 
IN JAMAICA SPRINT 


Sirde Next, 4 Lengths Back— 
Dutch Raider, Harvest Night 
and Donor Win for Jessop 


WOOD, FIELD 


Two weeks more should find the 
weakfish plentiful in Peconic Bay, 
and with the law removed from 
grass shrimp in mid-May, the bay 
anglers will be able to get their 
season under way. 

Although many of the salt water 
By WILLIAM D. RICHARDSON |migrants are early this year, we 

A man and a horse shared the|have received very few reports on 
spotlight at Jamaica yesterday, the|the weakfish situation. However, 
man being Jockey Job Dean Jessop|it takes but two or three days to 
of Nibley, Utah, and the horse|build up a large population of 
Busfuz, 9-to-10 favorite belonging|these fish in Peconic, once the 
to the Sunshine Stable of ‘Dan schools begin to arrive. The boat- 
Chappell of Miami. men also migrate, and many of 

Taking a leaf out of Basi! James’|the charter boats from Freeport, 
boak, Jessop, leading rider of last/Sayville and other Long Island 
year when he had 296 winners,|fishing ports tie up at Shinnecock 
scored a triple. a day or two before the chum- 

He Kenneth Murchison's|ming season opens. 

Dutch der home a head before| If you have never tried this 
Mra, W. A. Kelley's Bygones in the|fishing at Peconic this will be a 
first and squeezed through with/good year to start. In our opinion, 
the same margin when he rode|there is more real sport to be 
Deering Howe's Harvest Night in|found in this fishing, than in any 
the third. other form of bay angling. The 

His third triumph was on Howe's|®verage charter boat can handle 
Donor in the Cygnet Purse, the five or six weakfish anglers, which 
fourth race. Compared with the|reduces the expense considerably. 
others, this was a cinch, for Donor|And you are almost certain of 
won by a mere matter of four/more weakfish than you will want 
lengths. to eat. In common with moat mi- 

Jessop put many in the crowd of Srating species, the weakfish is 
28,438 in a happy frame of mind|not as plentiful as it was on our 
when he gained a photo verdict for| Coast, so don’t take any more than 
Dutch Raider over Bygones in the) YOu can use, ' 
operen, for the pay-off on the 5-| If you are a light tackle angler, 


year-old son of Hygro was $19.50|this will give you a real oppor- 
for $2 straight. tunity, for this fish is a natural 


Z for the four-ounce 
Harvest Night Favored Strangely enough, the fly rod 

Harvest Night was the favorite| angler seems to do better than the 
in the Thistle, paying $4.40. Donor|man with heavier tackle, for he is 
was second choice in the Cygnet, /unable to “horse” the fish and thus 
returning $8.20. |}cause the hook to pull out. 

It looked for a while as if Pa- 
tient Job was going to steer an- 
other one home in the $6,000 Trav- 
eller Purse, but that was where 
Buzfuz came in, as he usually does ' 
Jessop had the mount on True 
North, another Howe representa- 
tive, and until he reached the turn, | s,; 
True North was running the way 
he generally does sailing down the 
Widener chute at Belmont Park. 

The trouble was that he either)». 
forgot he wag supposed to turn 
or else didn't want to do so. At). 
any rate he didn't and Buzfuz, | 
length back at the half-mile mark, 
scored by four lengths over ira, | WARRIST HUR 
Ada L, Rice's Sirde to add further’ 
to his prestige as one of racing's 
most consistent performers and! 
$3,900 to his earnings, which stand 





Witlets 
Point 


i 


> 
ESeatz 


s3ace= 


Wednesday, May 1.... 
May 3... 


ssusekd 
we~eolkSPr 
soceases® 


-ooee~ 
s 
x 


© .iake . 
— 
- 
— 
= 
oe 
2 


Nourse 
(Supplied by t 


LS NO-HITTER 
Syracuse Right-Hander Allows 2 


Walks, Blanks Bisons, 5-0 


SYRACUSE, N. Y., April 30 “»— 
The race marked the first local Earl Harrist, 25-year-old Syracuse 
appearance for Sirde, who is being pitcher, hurled the first no-hit, no- 
pointed for the Metropolitan Handi-|run game of the 1946 International 
cap on Saturday, May 11. Charley| League season today as the Chiefs 
Givens, only recently returned to} whipped the Buffalo Bisons, 5-0. 
the saddle after serving in the! In scoring his second victory of 
Army, had the mount on Buzfuz. (the season against no defeats, the 
Louis Prima’s King Pretty sur-|blond righthander allowed only two 
vived a protest to win the sixth| batters to reach first, Ray Ham- 
by a nose from Mrs. Ethel D.| rick and Martin Tabachek receiv- 
Jacobs’ Stan Tracy and paid the|ing passes. Both Bisons died on 
day's fanciest price of $26.40. In| first. 
the nightcap Emil Schwartz-| Supported by errorless, although 
haupt’s Pukka Gin, almost an even| not sensational! play, Harrist struck 
money favorite in the mile andiout three batters and had the 
sixteenth Prospect, won by three 
lengths from Mrs. Edward Mul- 
renan's Bulrush, 


EVERY CARH 
WHAT’S 


Jessop Leaves for Louisville 


After the races, Jessop boarded 
a plane for Louisville, where he is 
scheduled to ride William duPont's| 
Hampden in Saturday's Kentucky 
Derby. 


Weights were announced for the| 1937 


"400 
*1000 


on the getaway program at Ja- 
maica Saturday. Mrs. Mulrenan’s 
First Fiddle drew top weight of 
128 pounds, with Mrs, Jacobs’ Sty- 
mie next at 127 and the Murlogg 
Farm's Fighting Step following at 
126. Mrs. Rice's pair, Snow Boots 
and Sirde, drew 122 each. In case) 
ten start, the Grey Lag will have) 
a gross value of $36,525, with! 
$26,025 ro'ng to the winner. 


ST. JOHN’S TOPS QUEENS | 


Triumphs by 10-7, Five Runs in. 
Seventh Deciding Contest | 


TION. 


Sell us your car now! 
for the next 30 days, if 


Pushing five runs across the 
plate in the home half of the sev- 
enth, the St. John’s University 
baseball team turned back the 
Queens College nine, 10 to 7, at 
Dexter Park, Woodhaven, yester- 
day. It was the fifth victory in 
eight starts for the Redmen this 
season. A 

St. John's big inning was fea- 
tured by Bob Noble's three-run! 
homer over the right-field barrier 

The score by innings: 


FOR YOUR CAR 
SELL. NOW AT PEAK FRICES 
After selling. eee your car ter 2 weeks 


withewt charee. 


EMPIRE ‘hive LO 3-2879 | 


10 AVE. 


0023100105 
260003 5 


Towbey (7) 


Queens 
Jonn's 
Batteries—Allen 


6 
0 
and = Bieter 


Smith Appeal Off Till Today 


Trainer om Smith's hearing 


the State Supreme Court in his 
appeal from his one-year suspen- 
jsion here on charges of having) 
stimulated Magnific Duel, Maine 


FOR SALE 


75 Cars $275 & up 


OPA Celling Prices or Under 


Cor 4 it & Bway - __ Circle 71-4452 
BUICK 1948 “SOL” ne, radia & heater; 
OPA ceil, $2,954 Huntoon & Raffo, 238 
wh @& co 5-9755 eet pines cae 
CHEVROLET 1946 4-dr sedan, BR & Hi; car 
in storage while veteran-owner oversens 
excellent condition; $660, Ti 
3-000. CE | ERROR IE KS A 
CHRYSLER Windsor, 1912; radio, heater; 
$1,550, OPA warranty ceiling; trades accept- 
Barrett Bros, 


ning race last fall, was postponed 
until today, it was learned yester- 
day. 


Charchill Downs Entries 


LOUISVILLE, KY 
hs 4 The Associated Press 
FIRST RACE—Purse $1,800: claiming: 4-year- 
}olds and upward; 


siz furlongs (chute) 
| Valdina Jane 107 ; Chief Knocker... *19 
Miss Stiver 14 | Say Yes ilé ed. terms arranged, others 
M. Louise _........107 | Boom On .* A} aE 3 
Watch Chiile | °' 114) inc. 4765 Park Av. SE 3 rsa eih dll 
100/ DODGE ‘37 sedan, $235, below ceiling. 775 





at ceiling 


claiming 





114 Three Percent 
Sir Jimmy *108 | Bowsprit 
|}On Board 1i7 | Lutie Bolo *102| Lexington Av, Bklyn 
| Judy Dunn . 107 | Garter et page — am > 

| Brin Marlin 107 LINCOLN sedan, 1937, perfect condition, mile- 

SECOND RACE—Purse $1,800: 3 | age 28.000. Model 3548. price $1,400 cash 
year-olds: six furlongs (chute) well below ceiling. Call TR 8-4712. 
Tetramore 108 | Ho Toy 110 OLDSMOBILE 1937, 5-passenger coupe, radio 
red Vixen ns fs med A Jack sl & heater, $450, below ceiling. Call from 7 

| Monann cee” _ near Av U. Bki 
Intriguing *100 | Cat Like 113 | Cote 9S Bt, neoe be 2, ye 

THIRD RACE—Purse $1,800; claiming: 4-year- | BOLLS-Reyee, town car, 1948. excellent condi- 
olds and upward; six furlongs (chute) tion; estate sale Call or write E. Janson, 
ommwees . 115 | Bolo Miss *103| RE 2-4350; 120 Bway N Y C 

Spirie 121 | Try Flying 118 aan ks ” anny 
Geneva Lad 113 | Rotate _ "103 | STUDEBAKER sedan, 11, 
Timocrac *108 | Mibob 113|_ below OPA ceiling. F. & 

FOUR RACE—Purse $1,800; claiming: 4-|% S4tM 0 ee the 
year-olds and upward; six furlongs (chute). (i946 PLYMOUTH new 4-deor special deluxe 
| Lady Allen “268 | Migration 118; sedan, immediate delivery at ceiling price, 
Meshach 117 | Chero-Kaid *114/$1,140: in exchange for modern 4 room un- 
Dell Yit 115 | Sister Fox *10T furnished apartment in W Bronx or Yonkers, 
SeratGene F. 7} a ad Bud 116/$100 rental. Auto dealer, BE 2-3748 

o ; . ttn A tn — - a — 
ee a oer | Trevate Bowe US| NEW Lt or ~ er Rng — seeps. 

FIFTH RACE—Purse $2,200: allowances: 4- immediate jelivery ceiling utomotive 
year-olds and upward; six furlongs (chute). |S#les, 1424 Eastern Parkway, Brooklyn, PR 
Syrian Boy 112 | Burgoolette 107 | 3-9203 ciiiniabeetemtaaanl 
Empty Plate .. 110 | Sandslinger 116|CONVERTIBLE Cadillac, sedan, 1997, clean, 
Mighty Lucky . 113 | Devilss con- 
Or-Tetra ; 110 | Sergeant Bill 
pony Leo ‘ 110 | Tutelo ° 
Dark Heather *105 | Uncle Otho 
You Buddy 112 

SIXTH RACE—The Debutante Stakes; $10.- 
000 added: 2-vear-olds: five furlongs 
aMiss Neal 119 | Gayest eee 
bJeannie Pie ......119 | bDainty Red . 
Blue Grass «+» 414 | War Fan 
aBlank Dismay ...119 | Mise Mood 
Fibekas ° 119 | My Margie 


Flash Flood ...... 119 | Little Stings -.: 
Leokout Jester 122 


112) black finish, white top: good runnin 
ll2/ dition. r and h; below ceiling, GR 
“10T | 53-6674 after 6 
‘18 |e WILLYS jeeps, new, all-purpose cari im- 
mediate delv; ceil. Dewey Motors, Inc, 1777 
Coney Island Av, Bklyn. Nightin: ale 5-0022 
114\1936 DODGE, 4-door sedan fer sale, motor 
tie pane tires “, « rance shabby; $275 
il below ceiling. BE 6-4 a Sve 
18 \16i PACKARD, ¢-deor sedan, deluxe 1D), 6 
"te wheels, radio. heater. excellent condition; 
$1,550. OPA ceiling. LO 17-6937. 
al C. Ellis entry; DWilllam Veeneman entry MO 
Phe by RA Purse $2,000; allowances: FOR SALE eee ee meters 
oe eae and upward; one mile and « six- Call Cl 7-6500, Ext Ti, bet 9-12 AM, 3-5 PM. 
oe RUD «.. "112 TRAILERS & TRACTORS 
; coca” 1 *10 = a = 
Drum Fire ie | Vreane We ‘ jjlonal trailer coach, 1547, 3 
Drol} 
claiming condition: 


Drum 110 | vi Wal 
enna Walts 08 
feet. 1- 
EIGHTH ‘RACE-—Purse $1,800 4. |lent , el 
r-olds and upward; one mile and « six-|Chariemont. Mass ot.) 
— -.. ML) Bver Playful STATION WAGONS—BUSES 
seg | Botley... STATION WAGONS REPAIRED — 


106 

2 
: 112 | Nancy's Baby ” REFINISHED FACTORY PROCESS 

Little Monarch "107 | STATION WAGONS COMPANY 

*Five pounds apprentice allowance claimed. ‘Sth St and First Avenue EL 5-885 


it | Wise Paisano 


. Ne 
rooms, electric refri re 
" ir 


By RAYMOND R. CAMP 


fly rod. | 


Table for High Tide for Waters Adjacent to New York 


May 1—Sun rises at 4:56 A. M.: sete at 651 PM 


We pay AS HIGH 


Champion: gose,| 22, CHEVROLET. \, ton panel trock 
W. Storage, 167) 


=~ 


Lt 38 


CHICAGOANS ROLL 
1,204 IN DOUBLES 


Thomas and Lackey High for 
Day at Buffalo—No Changes 
Among A. B. C. Leaders 


— 


AND STREAM 


The older skippers are better 
than the youngsters for this fish- 
ing, so when you select a boat! 
make sure the captain knows the! 
bay. It is important to know the| 
location of the good channels, and| se 
we knew one old-timer who found) 
his fishing ground in Peconic by a} BUFFALO, April 30 “®—Keg- 
weird method. When the mast was Jers failed to dent the standings 
on a line with an old windmill and/|list in doubles and singles compe- 
the cofner of the cabin lined up tition today at the American Bow- 
with a staked-out cow, he dropped !ing Congress’ championships. 
the hook, Capt. Walt Willis often| Chicago's George Thomas and 
remarked that the fishing would Andy Lackey accounted for the 
be spoiled if the farmer moved his|top doubles figure of 1,221. Thomas 
cow. hit 590 (225—179—186), and 

Fifteen quarts of grass shrimp,| Lackey 631 (192—228—211). 

a few dozen sandworms and a; The peak singles was 687, by 
captain who knows the bay should' Harold Rudert of Cape Girardeau, 
provide you with a day you will|Mo., on games of 201, 200 and 236. 
remember. For tackle we use a| Joe Rost of Massilon, Ohio, roll- 
4-ounce, 8% foot fly rod, with ajing in the doubles, delivered the 
fly reel loaded with 10-pound test| outstanding series, 663 on games 
nylon line, a very small swivel and| of 224, 194 and 245, Top solo game 
a 4-foot level nylon leader. You|was 266 in the single, by Howard 
can use either a small weakfish| Decker of Rochester, N. Y., who 
squid, a small spinner, with a sin-| followed with 169 and 175 for 610. 
gle hook, or you can eliminate the THE LEADERS 

lure and just use a weakfish hook) FIVE-MAN TEAMS 
with a dangling worm. Heil Co, Milwaukee ™ 

Once you have built up a chum) Chtne tromily Recreation, Detroit 
line with the shrimp it is usually|Fite Electric Supply Co.. Detroit 
only a matter of minutes before|\““" eee 
the weakfish begin feeding in it.jJonn Gworek—Henry Kmidowski, Buffalo 
If the worm doesn’t produce too| fd Sgeecdune- tuck, rapes, Norscod. Ouse 
ray bay a few grass shrimp on Gite Ly. Rowiehs. my aay 

e hook. n Hanis—? ornis! ansas City, 
| Even a 2-pound weakfish on this! 4 porg PAB 
|tackle is a lot of sport, but just/Eimer Voss, Cincinnati 
bear in mind that he has a soft| Fi Etter. Waukesan. 0 
mouth and that you have light! Adam Plunge, Chicago amesieeen 
}tackle. They take quite a few 8 ALL-EVENTS 
land 10-pound weaks out of Pe-/iiee ee ee ‘Leandro 
|conic, so be sure you have at least| John Hogan. Paterson, N. J 
100 yards of line on the reel. ¥ 


BEES 


ES 3 


m 


eorge Theel, Chicago 
Frank Benkovic, Dallas 
lJoe Norris, Detroit 

Daniel Miestand, Allentown, Pa 


Other News of Sports 
On Next Page 


Tex 


as 
. 
- 


| Fire tetand | 
inlet 
AM | 


arnegat | 
L 


=f 


esese= 


& Se6sks 


} 


385545" 
220-4? ae 
S8S6g2=e 


Pr 
7 
7 
a 
s 
0 
1 


Sovusgs 
head 
wre Oee 


- 


~~ 


1 
1 
12.33) 


- 
- 
rs 


= 


: 
& 


are given in Eastern Standard Time. 
he United States Coast and Geodetic Survey) 


popping up most of the 
The outfielders handled ten 
easy chances. 

| A native of Dubach, La., Harrist 
|was discharged from the Army in 
|the midsummer of 1945 and fin- 
ished last season with the Cincin- 
jnati Reds. The National Leaguers 
jreleased him outright to Syracuse 
a month ago. 


Bisons 
iw 


Sta., N. Y. & Flotbush Ave. 8’klyn, 
from 11:15 direct to track. ; 
BY SUBWAY: 6th & Bth Aver Subweys 
to Parsons Bivd. Sto. Jamaica, eon 
necting with buses. 
BY BUS: Fr Parsons Bivd. Sub. Ste. 
Jomaica ‘dh & 8th Ave. Lines) cise 
connecting with Jamoica Une fi 
trains at 140th $t., Jomaice. 
FIRST RACE 1:30 P.M. 


cewraom. "17S no 
Coidren not admired 


! . : 
| Burlington of Barons Traded 
CLEVELAND, April 30 (P— 
_The Cleveland Barons today traded 
itheir high-scoring center, Tommy) 
| Burlington, and Russ Brayshaw, | 
wing, to the Providence Reds for 
| Jacques Lavoie, center, and Roger 
|Gagne, wing. President Al Sutphin 
‘said it was a straight player deal, 
with no cash involved. 


a name 


for over OO years 


THE BONDED 
HAVANA CIGAR 


RENT ACA 
| Toho 


AS ITS PRICE 
YOURS? 


41-42 
CARS 


*1400 


‘700 
*2000 


A WORD TO THE WISE: USED CAR PRICES WILL DROP 
DRASTICALLY WHEN NEW CARS ARE IN FULL PRODUC- 
SELL US YOUR CAR NOW WHILE PRICES OF MANY 
1941 AND 1942 CARS ARE HIGHER THAN NEW 1946 CARS 
OF THE SAME MAKE AND MODEL. 
We buy any year, make or model 
regardless of condition 
@ Special Offer e 
You may continue to use it 


Nearly ocw cers and station wageme 


always available by the week 
> a 


or month All cars full 
CALL CIRCLE 5-8394 
Ask tor Mr. White 
LANDRIVE., Inc 
1825 Broadway (near 60th Bt.) 


+See GG GGG GGG Geena e = 


SSBB eee aaas 
| sP Seen eeeeeaaa 


you wish, without charge. 


HOLT-DeLAND 


CORNER S6th STREET & BROADWAY, N. Y. 


CIRCLE 


= 1946 er late model 
ear er station wagon 
by day, week or meoath 


DRIVE IT YOURSELF 
BONDED U DRIVE IT, Inc. 


1696 Broadway (53d) 
CALL CIRCLE 6-5333 


7-4452 
Don't Wait! Sell! 


CONSULT US FOR TOP GASH 
G. M. T. MOTORS CO. 


ATWATER 9-4970 9-9669 


Buyers Ge Anywhere 


1749 Ist Ave. (91st) 


AUTOMOBILE EXCHANGE 


AUTOS & TRUCKS WANTED 


——— | “TINCOLN—MERCURY ~ 


20-1945 

ond 
KS, 626, 3-ton Red Dismon SELL OR TRADE YOUR CAR TO 
PARK MOTOR SALES 


ten wheels * 
CO 5.7476 


Tnternational 
Mtr. 5 sp transmission & seus 
spare. spage parts, tools, canvas ver 

12 f wmetal body & 19000 Ib 
mounted winch JULIUS HERENSTREIT | 
HA 68-1461, 56-15 56 St (Bette Avi, Maaspet 
LI 


‘45 GMC 2',-TON 10-WHEEL 
NEW ARMY TRUCK _ i Z 
DEXTA, Ist Av.-97th St., AT 9-2998 
CHEVROLET 1941 heavy duty 2-ton, rack body 
excellent condition. $1,250 David Connett 
406 5 33d. EL 55156 lia 
CHEVROLET, 194%, 1% TON CARGO 
_MOTOR DUAL _ WHEELS. Gi 2-2710 a 
3-TON International coal truck, goed condition 
one 3, one 4-tom high litt coal body. 1 000 
gallons skirted of] tankers. DUmont 
| (New lt Ph Rt le c . 
ist CHEVROLET truck, iG-ton, clo body. CGLIDDEN B CORP. 
good condition $450. below cetling 


|terms, $200 down. Call CA 6-9205 mee) BWAY at 55th ST. Clrele 6 wWi4 


|B M MACK, i8 f% closed body; B X Mack, 15 ~~ yy wg ye 
‘t closed body; 1 Stewart truck, 14 ft chassis tk ry ~~ gy 
, 
S CO. INC. 


114 Morgan Av. Bklyn. EV 8-2930 _ H. M. WILLIAM 


t 1884 Bway (62d) 


SEE 
JACOD 


yo WANT TO TRADE OF 
Bwa het 4 Sts ] 


TO SELL OR BUY 
A Good Used Car See 
TURNURE MOTORS 
Successors to 
_CHRYSLER-N Y¥ 


chatr 





SEI 
5 


L 


4) 


NEW 
oT +. 


ST Bway 
All care sold at 


~ BUICKS AND OTHERS | 


All Makes. Models Bought for Cash 
UICK 


eling of bet 


»” 


21 


2 . . We a Bay 
a ee, We See ee STUDEBAKER MOTOR CARS & TRUCK: 
— Bway at 56 St CO 5-748 
tase, new rubber Randall, DA 3 L 
\TUETON Autocar, 18-11 closed body, very good TIMES SQUARE MOTORS 
~ 
FRUCK. W0-ton Seal who. GNC. "ted, vith CIrcle 6-0235 
out body. HSOT Times 
a +L ~| MANUFACTURER needs immediately for sales 
| ALL MAKES BOUGHT FOR TOF FRICE force, 3 cars, Al conditien: price secondary 
MANHATTAN PONTIAC CORP 
|1842 Bway. cor 60 St U ' : gs Co, NE 
FIND OUT in one minute what your car is 


ee - 
182 KS INTERNATIONAL. 3-5 jon, long wheel = WE PAY THE LIMI il = — 
condition. Call RI 89-2200 
er 
ic, 
) AE LE Lanne a 1706 BROADWAY (COR & ST). 
AUTOS & TRUCKS WANTED - ae ~ omy 
| “ SU 17-1100 ota pals ad Phone Sales Manager, 
| WE BUY FOR RESALE TO VETS 
worth. Call RA &-2524 Boulevard Motors, 





| EAST SIDE CHEVROLET 
|l_Av & 61 St RE 7-'500 wo. Bivd, cor 49 St, L 1 C. Open eves & Sun. 
| WANTED, wate, betier grade sedan, 1y36- mone : - 
| 1988; melt be i good condition. Smith, AL} AUTOS AND TRUCKS FOR RENT 
4960. TRUCKS for rent with-witheet drivers. NYT o¢ 
car, ‘39 or newer;| Rklyn, week. month, or year. Perontl Auto 


4. eves 
|PRIVATE vet buyer wants 
| principals only. Call CI 7-426, 9-5 weekdays Trucking Co, MA 4-3688 
Saturday-Sunday Enclewood 3-9052. | ‘3g PACKARD limousine fer hire with chaut~ 
| CADILLAC fe still paying cash pr for late| feur JE 6-7608 
model cars of all makes. Call Circle 17-6500. GETERAN, ball-ton truck, make ight @e~ 
___ CADILLAC, 1730 Broadway (55th St). | liveries, available at once. HIS3 Times 
PACKARDS. others. bought for cash. \RENT ao trailer (Bantam) carries 1 ten. Ae 
Bway at om ae -- 3 5.5000 | taches any car. (Landrive) Circle 5-6394 


WANTED for caper, 5 Gheerelet and 3G 6 @| ne cot nie fer race tench; insured, Becnsed 
new trucks, 7%-ton each. Reply in full detail 


chauffeurs. JE 8-1704 
and ce. Prompt delivery, WH 4-4998 | 


___ AUTOMOBILE DRIVING SCHOOLS 
SUICK "di sedancile, excellent condition; prin- LEARN to drive; cars with double clutch & 
| only. MU 4-6700. Apt 923 rene, TS ee also cars for road test. 
ia tine or more, an , parts. Wigh | tvs. ORchard ¢ See? 
prices. TR 5-5683. Fischer, 141 3 AY. Bkiyn. | RELIABLE Aste School, 1067 Bway, in 4 
CARS ter Motors =p. 2336) 2-414. FO 17-8662. New Rochelle. Yonkers 
Grand Concourse, SE 35-3883. 


|CONVERTIBLE wanted, any year or model 


\. co, INC, 
| about $300. #392 Times 188 10 ay (64th). CO 6-sm 





PRO LOOP CHANGES 


PLAYER CONTRACT 


Bell, National Football League 


Head, Says New Form Adds 
to Protection of Men 


‘SERVITUDE’ IS ELIMINATED) 


Commissioner Feels Jumpin 
Will Be Checked — Meeting 
Ends on Note of Harmony 


By ALLISON DANZIG 
The club owners of the National 
Football League signed off late 
yesterday afternoon, following 
three days and two nights of de- 
liberations at the Hotel New 
Yorker, feeling at peace with all 
the world except the All-America 
Conference and not too unkindly 

disposed toward the rival loop. 
Reclining at his ease after the 
final drop of the gavel, Commis- 
sioner Bert Bell was the quintes- 
sence of contentment and amiabil- 


ity. Had All-America Commis- 
sioner Jim Crowley walked into 
the picture it would have posed no 
embarrassment at all, 
pletely melting 


pervaded the room. 

“It was the best meeting the 
National League ever had,” said 
Bell, proud as Punch. “We have 
the best schedule we ever had. Ev- 
ery one had the chance to talk 
himself out and get what he had 
to say off his chest. There were 
no arguments, no fights. It w 
harmony all the way. Everybody 
pulled together. Only once did any- 
one so much as raise his voice. 
That was George Marshall. I told 
him: ‘Keep your shirt on, George,’ 
and George apologized. 


A Genius With Schedules 


“Bay, there's a fellow that 
knows his schedules. That Mar- 
shall is a genius when it comes to 
schedules. If every one in the 
league knew ag much about them 
as he does we'd never find our- 
selves with a poor one.” 

It was epparent enough that the 
commisaioner, the club owners and 
all other interested parties attend- 
ing the conclave feel they have a 
house in perfect order and are pre- 
pared to meet the enemy and al! 
contingencies at full strength. They 
did not give the rival league the 
satisfaction of taking action on 
its proposal for a common draft 
and a world series, dismissing “t| 
without discussion. 

The final session was an anti- 
climax after the adoption on Mon- 
day of the fifty-five-game sched- 
ule, on which the New York Giants 
are the most favored club, with 


seven attractive home offer:ngs to| Metropolitan area. 
|Grover Cleveland, 


meet the competition of Dan Top-! 
ping’s New York Yankees at the| 
Stadium. The day was given over 
chiefly to the discussion of ways 
and means of improving and con- 
solidating college relations and to 
the adoption of a new player con- 
tract. 


Obligations Are Specified 


The new contract, explained 
Bell, is a give-and-take proposition 
designed to bring about as much 
mutual consideration as possible. 
It specifies obligations of the club| 
and of the player and adds to the! 
protection of the player. The con-| 
tract is for one year, with an op- 
tion on the player’s services for 
the succeeding season at a speci- 
fied price. 

“Heretofore,” explained Bell, 
“we have talked about the player. 
Now we talk about the player and 
the club, about their responsi- 
bilities to one another. For exam- 
ple, if the player fails to report in 
condition to play, he can be sus- 
pended until he gets into condi- 
tion, but if the player is hurt in 
the I:tne of duty the club has the 
written responsibility of not only 
paying his full salary but of tak- 
ing care of his hospitalization and 
medical bills. Also, instead of . 
game-to-game contract, the clu 
now pays the player so much tor 
the season.’ 

“This contract,” went on the 
commissioner, “eliminates ‘servi- 


so com-| 
and disarming} 
were the sweetness and light that) 


SPORTS 


Sports of 


Res. U. &. 


In the Heart of 


EXINGTON, Ky., April 30—The turf probably 
has more critics to the square foot than 
any sport which ever existed. Anyone who 

ever was pushed around in the rude, greedy, bus- 
tling crowds at one of the New York race tracks 
goes away with the rather disgusted impression 
that the hoss game is nothing but a gigantic lot- 
tery, a second cousin to the numbers racket. 

But that's the ugly, distasteful side of racing. 
The gentile, delightful, wholesome side of it exists 
down here, where man has @ deep and abiding 
love for a horse and not for a set of figures blink- 
ing on a tote board. It's a side that rarely is ex- 
ploited because it hasn't the eye-catching appeal 
of a 100-to-1 shot, of a $4,000,000 day or of a 
50,000 crowd. Yet this is the very essence of the 
turf. Without it there would be nothing. 

The phrase, “improvement of the breed,” has 
been kicked around by the cynics until it has be- 
come a term of derision, so all-embracing that it 
reaches from Col. E. R. Bradley down to the low- 
liest peddler of a tout-sheet, but it takes a trip 
such as this to open the eyes of a tourist to the 
land of the Bluegrass and make him realize that 
improving the breed has comparatively little to 
do with mob scenes outside the mutuel windows. 

This is another world entirely, almost a dream 
world with stately mansions that almost look to 
be plucked bodily from a sequence of “Gone With 
the Wind.” It’s a land of sprawling green coun- 
tryside, of white fences, of barn after barn and 
of beautiful horses by the thousands. The races 
themselves are proving grounds for genetic theo- 
ries rather than fast ways to earn a dollar. 


Carefu! Planning 


A race horse is no accident of birth. He's 
planned that way. The breeder picks his sire and 
his dam for certain qualities that appeal to him. 
He supervises the mating and the foaling with 
all the meticulous care of a surgeon in an obstet- 
rical ward. But that scrawny, leggy foal then is 
committed to the lap of the gods. His develop- 
ment and growth as a yearling, 2-year-old and 
the like can be directed only slightly. It’s his in- 
nate characteristics which control his destinies. 

This is a huge gamble which dwarfs into insig- 
nificance the gambling at the mutuels. New 
Broom sold for $75,000 as a yearling and didn't 
earn a dime. Alsab sold for $700 and earned 
$350,000. The gamble even goes beyon’ birth. A 
breeder has to book his mares years ahead for 
the stallions of his choice. If something goes 
wrong in the interval the opportunity may be 
gone forever. 

It’s all a tremendously expensive process, too. 
A colt or filly will cost from $1,500 to $2,000 up 
to the yearling stage. Then it’s anywhere from 
$500 to $5,000 from the yearling to 2-year-old 
point. After that it runs from $250 to $400 a 
month. The two-buck bettor doesn’t fit in that 
picture at all. Mostly it’s a labor of love. Colonel 
Bradley, for instance, can afford his tremendous 
plant with its 1,200 acres, but once the 87-year- 
old patriarch of Idle Hour Farm is gone no one 


' 
| 
| 
; 
| 


4 val 
—[EElEeEl__Ia_""=zrR—"veaea0qucegKgqC""""""{]{_]{_"__"_]_a"_"==[ia"[{naEi=eEu"x*{_]___=_=«ik”~ih'"u"ueauNnan"n"nann9eerl oo _E__= 
ri 


3 LOCAL SCHOOLBOYS 
PITCH NO-HIT GAMES 


Three no-hit games were record- 
ed yesterday by schoolboy pitchers 
in a heavy schedule played in the 

b Kunze of 
defending City 
P.S.A.L. champion, hurled a per- 
fect game as he faced only twenty- 
one men in giving his team a 6-0 
verdict over Forest Hills at Arctic 
Oval in Brooklyn. 

Ray Goeller, St. Francis Prep 
right-hander, parted with no hits 
and no runs and struck out four- 

teen while pitching the Red and 
Blue to a 2-0 triumph over St. 
Michael's in the Brooklyn C.H.S8. 
A.A, at the Prospect Park Parade 
Grounds. Although yielding nine 
walks, Billy Tuite gave Manhattan 
Prep a no-hit 10-1 sion over St. 
Nicholas of Tolentine at Van Cort- 
landt Park. He struck out five. 
The run scored him was 
the result of four consecutive bases 
on balls. 

In another outstanding per- 
formance, Bob Cohen of New 
Utrecht fanned twenty-three men 
and gave five safeties while the 
Green and White struggled thir- 
teen innings to a 1-all tie with Til- 
den in the Brooklyn P.S.A.L. at 
Tilden. George Principe also went 
the route for the home forces, fan- 
ning twelve and allowing « dozen 
blows. 


Yankees vs. Cleveland 
tedium, i6lst Street 


College and Sc 


BASEB 


La. Tech 4.. 
Lenoir 


MANCINI OUTPOINTS COSTA 


magietere Unanimous Verdict at 
- the Broadway Arena 


Lenny (Boom Boom) Mancini, 


Elen $ pa 
lowa Navy Pre-Flight ii : 


tude.’ For that reason, Bell is of|/147%, Youngstown, Ohio, pounded 
the belief that it has a betterjout an easy decision over Vic 
chance of standing up in the/Costa; 146%, Bronx, in the main 
courts. The contract specifies that jattraction of eight rounds last 
the club has the right to enjoin any/night at the Broadway Arena, 
player by injunction proceedings Brooklyn, before 4,100. It was a 
from skipping out, and Bell and unanimous verdict as the favored 
lawyers who helped to draw the|Midwesterner punished his rug- 
paper believe that it will serve to|ged foe throughout and in the 
put a check on players jumping to|fifth had opened a bad cut under 
another league, though the com-|his right eye. Johnny Vann, 
missioner admitted that it depend-|14114, Brooklyn, outpointed Roger 
ed a good deal upon the individual|Whynott, 146%, Quebec City, in 
court’s interpretation of the law. |the six-round semi-final. 


In two other scheduled sixes, 
Discuss College Players Earl (Tex) Wilson, 184, Gaines- 


There was long discussion of the ville, Tex., got off the floor four 
league's relations with college |times to gain the honors over 
players. It is planned to go back/Cliff Mann, 192, New York, and 
to the pre-war standard of college) Al Marzerol, 140, Limestone, Me., 
player eligibility, under which the|knocked out Tony Daniels, 134%, 
player cannot be signed or tam-/Garfield, N. J., in 1:30 of the 
pered with until his class has been| inaugural round. 
graduated. How far the league) Johnny Mazanoble, 14744, Sche- 
will go in this direction depends|nectady, stopped Jose Malendez, 
upon the practices of the All-/145%, Puerto Rico, in 1:09 of the 
America loop. “Our draft,” said)second stanza, and Abe Hopes, 
Bell, “is the college player's best|164, Brooklyn, won on a technical 
protection.” knockout over Joe Gibbs, 159, 

An ment was signed with/Brooklyn, in 1:39 of the first 
the Pacific Coast League and Chile/round in two bouts scheduled for 
Walsh, general manager of the/four rounds apiece. 


ered to iron out conflicts in exhi-| BELLOISE STOPS JONES 


ered to iron out conflicts in exhi- 
bition games in that section and 
oo Aaron eee eater ts Counted Out in Fourth, 

at may develop. Rufus Klawans 
Coast League president, took the in Bout ) at Park Arena Albion Be big 
contract home for ratification by Steve Belloise. 161 Bronx, | ; ; 
knocked out Johnny Jones, cums Cy ® 


his group. 155, 
Pittsburgh, in the feature 


SMALLER BALL RETAINED attrac- 


— listed for eight rounds at the 
ark Arena in the Bronx. Floored 
Royal and Ancient Keeps British, a the end of the third round, 
Golf Pellet Now in Use Jones had to be carried to his cor- 
—__— ner. When the bell for the fourth 
ST. ANDREWS, Scotland, Apriljround sounded, the Pittsburgh 
30 ()—The Royal and Ancient/battler responded but collapsed 
Golf Club of St. Andrews, rule-|without a blow being struck and 
making body for al! British golf-|was counted out by Referee Barney 
ers, decided tonight to retain the|Feiix. It was the Bronx fighter’s 
small-sized ball for at least threejeighth straight success and sev- 
more years. enth knockout since he was dis- 
The club rejected a suggestion,/charged from the. Navy. 
strongly backed by former Minis-| Tomas Beato, 125, San Domingo, 
ter of Production Oliver Lyttelton,|made his American ‘debut a sin 
to adopt the American 1.68-inch/lar one ag he knocked out Al Cella, 
diameter ball instead of its pres-|128%, Jamaica, in 1:54 of the fifth) 
ent 1.62-inch diameter pellet. Each|of the scheduled six-round semi-| 
ball weighs 1.62 ounces. final. 


Manhasset 
saemastge sr 10 


——ay 
New Direchi 1 
(13 innt 


Reslyn 7.. .. as 
mM. Agnes Aca. (C. PF.) 
St. Augustine's 4.... 


scrooLs 
LACROSSE 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, 


the Gimes 


Pat. off. 


By ARTHUR DALEY 


the Bluegrass 


else could possibly maintain it at the loss it in- 
variably has. 

The ramifications of breeding are astounding. 
From a theoretical standpoint pedigree is para- 
mount. Yet that’s not sufficient of itself. It was 
Major Loule Beard of Greentres who remarked 
crisply today: “Theory isn't enough. You have to 
study the practical aspects, too.” 

Then the major-domo of the Whitney estates 
added, “I prefer to start with performance. Then 
I look for soundness, which includes conformation 
and temperament. After that comes pedigree— 
which is turning everything upside down from a 
theoretical standpoint. I don't give a hoot for the 
best pedigree in the world without performance.” 


Only Winners Need Apply 


The records bear him out. Grant Dorland, one 
of the smaller breeders, made a study of the sub- 
ject and discovered that only two top stallions 
never were race winners, Ultimus and High Time. 
But by skipping a few equine generations, you'll 
find that each stems from the Domino line, one 
of the very best. 

One extremely illuminating remark on the in- 
tricacies of breeding was dropped by Olin Gentry, 
the general manager of Idle Hour Farm, who is 
considered one of the best. A visitor who had 
been impressed by the blazing speed of Count 
Fieet and Beaugay in recent years said wistfully 
that they should be able to produce a foal who 
would be tremendously fast. 

“No good,” said Olin sadly but patiently. “Nei- 
ther of them has strong legs. I'd prefer to mate 
them to members of the Fair Play line which is 
noted for its sturdy legs.” It's such details as 
that which never enter the minds of the Jamaica 
railbirds. 

Perhaps some of them think they know horses, 
but they don’t. You realize that down here, where 
small boys and feeble old grandmothers can dis- 
cuss lineage, track manners, relative speed and 
what-not with astonishing exactitude. You don't 
even see their like at the metropolitan courses, 
which undoubtedly is the reason why the New 
York Racing Associations arranged this educa- 
tional tour to the Bluegrass country for the mem- 
bers of the fourth estate. 

The other night at Idle Hour the 10-year-old 
son of Gentry flashed a roll of $7 on his father 
and remarked, “Hep, Pop, it looks as though the 
Gentrys are in the chips.” He's used his soundly 
acquired knowledge of horseflesh to bet a few 
bob on the nags, Essentially that was gambling, 
a habit not generally recommended for small 
boys. But somehow or other his ingeniousness 
about the operation and his youthful pride in 
having his opinions justified made it seem per- 
fectly all right. 

Racing in Kentucky is go completely different 
from New York that it has to be seen to be 
believed—and understood. The heart of the turf 
beats strongly down here. It's only the para- 
sites who cling to the outer skin which give it 
a bad name. 


N. Y. U. NINE DEFEATS 


Spee Sandy Silverstein watched a 
and ives Ae 


venue ten-run bulge built up for him in 

sohn| the course of six innings diminish 

_| to a mere two markers in the sev- 

““jenth, but he managed to stagger 

‘|through that inning, and went on 

to hurl New York University to 

a 15-10 victory over Manhattan 

| ceils on Ohio Field. The Vio- 

iets have not met defeat so far in 

| league competition, while Manhat- 

tan is now one notch out of the 

cellar, with one victory and three 
losses. 

After Coach Bill McCarthy had 
taken out several of his first- 
stringers when the Violets were 
— by 12—2 going into the sev- 

attan suddenly 
aeciahhenten out Bilverstein's 
slants, and before the seventh was 
over, eight Jaspers had crossed the 
pee on six hits, including a double 
y Mitch Daher and a triple by 
Dave Farabrough. 
The box score: 
MANHATTAN 


hool Resalts 


ALL 


| meeo--euwocow~® 
ce~~—Seunw-cowo”® 
Sc2980-eu-—-esse-—"*C 
ouw-e~~~euwr~ewec”™ 
eue-cco-ne--cok 
—e-eeccecceow* 

| ee-e-es-e2se¢0" 


* eet 
oe 
Seso 


Brescia. 
Sacrifice — am bases — 
Haltond, Extract 2 
Manhatten 6, N. ¥ ° *“ 
Pelka Struck out-—Ry 
Rates on bails—Off Thorton 


Wild pitth— —Milverstetn. 
Oft_ Thorton in 3 tpaines 
, Burke 4 in 12-8 lasing 
Unppee—Sicent Meehan 
Time of game 


uble play—Quinlan 
on 3, Bilver- 
Burke | 


Passed 


uster Brown. 


Minor Leagues 


By The Associated Press 


=B! 


a 
i 


INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE 
AT SYRACUSE 
R.H. 
: 8 00000 0000 6 
Syracuse 661013 60.-6 8 
Batteriee—Houtteman and Tabacheck; Harriat 
Other clubs not scheduled 


STANDING OF THE CLUBS 
w.L. Pc 


a : $3 ; i Bi Jersey cliy: 
treal ....6 H 


Toronto 
GA 
Newark at Buffalo. 
Jersey Ci 


i 


lig 


we 


ff 


TEKS 
5 5 
q8 


| Rochester ; 


ee telat ted ted ed ek tok tt 


SOUTHERN [ASSOCIATION 


Nashville §, allonte 
Birmingham 13, Chattancogs 4. 


Mobile at "Monday x rain 
Night Game) 

Chattanooga 11, Birmingham 6 
stare OF THE aR. 

5 .688 | Atlanta 

i} 5 - Little Rock ..6 
Ch t'nooga 40 A => pm 8 
Hhviile ... 7 


AMERICAN JASSOCIATION 
Minneapolis 5, 


Indiana 


Mare Psenwew 


L 
98 5 
; s 
oh |S thd 
Chaminaés 2 


wi 
.. Mitixia U. 


9. 2 ‘tat, 7 innings) 
: &, ndlanapots 2 (24). 
Other clubs not echedaled. 

STAD “or T THE aus 


me ; 4 city. 
polis. H Milwaukee o 
TEXAS LEAGUE 

, Obla ty 4. 


Houston 5, t3 
Fort Worth at Oklahoma. City, wet grounds 


eTampYp N gor ‘THE CLUBS 
Antonio i 


z 
}| Mariners tied the issue as Van- 


‘home plate on Sherry’s double. 


3 (*)—Paul T. Kearney of 


iY Re: {i Bes: 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


QUALIFYING ROUNDS 168 PASSED TEST 
FOR U. 5. OPEN SET FOR BAR ADMISSION 


Linksmen Will Seek to a State Board ae a Examiners 
Title Tournament Places | Lists 126 Candidates Who 
on 26 Courses June 3 Have Been Certified 


Qualifying rounds for this year’s 
national open golf championship, 
to be played at the Canterbury | 
Golf Club, Cleveland, on June 13- 
15, will be held in twenty-six 
places in the country, it was an- 
nounced yesterday by the United 
States Golf Association. The date 
for the trials has been set for 
Monday, June 3, aud the tests will 
be over the thirty-six-hole route. 

This is one site less than in 1941, 
when the championship was played 
at Fort Worth, Tex. That year the 
Lone Star State had two qualify- 
ing centers. This year there will 
be only one. 

Another change in the pattern 
that existed in 1041 is a shift in 


six of the districts: in New Eng- 
land, from Worcester, Mass., to 
Waterbury, Conn.; in Nebraska, 
from Omaha to Lincoln; in North 
Carolina, from Pinehurst to Greens- 
boro; in Oklahoma, from Tulsa to 
Oklahoma City; in Texas, from 
Dallas and Houston to Fort Worth, 
and in the Pacific Northwest, from/| 
Portland to Seattle. 


Bozzo 
St; 
ave: 
Growth of the Plan 
Sectional qualifying for the o 


Special to Tue New Yoru Trees, 

ALBANY, April 30-—-The State, 
Board of Law Examiners, com-| 
posed of John Kirkland Clark of! 
New York, Philip J. Wickser of 
Buffalo and John T. DeGraff of 
Albany, announced today that 158 
of the 358 applicants who took the 
examination for admission to the 
bar on March 6 and 7 were suc- 
cessful. 

Of the 158 successful applicants 
126 have been certified to the four 
Appellate Divisions of the State) 
and the remaining thirty-two will 
be certified after they have filed 
proof of full compliance with the 
rules of the Court of Appeals. 

Every applicant must appear,be- 
fore the Committee on aracter 
and Fitness in his judicial district 
to be examined as to his character 
and fitness. 

The 126 receiving the board's |, 
certificates are 

FIRST DEPARTMENT 
resale Sie: sie, fowne oe 
° 244 W. 2334 & 


a 
‘189 E. 44th st. 
Nathan, 250 W. 85th St: Birman, Caroline 
h St; Saceeme M 


iz. let Bostick, 
hen 46th gona, 


Berne 
35 
qs 


St.; 10 
Brewer, Seymour . Convent |, 
Brown, Gien J Isao ‘Archer Road; 
Burnet, Aminta C. N., 7 Edgecombe Ave; 
chars E. 176th St.; Butts, 
W. 150th St 
has been in vogue since 1924 Reales i30 interes ‘Ave: Giark ielen 
as 
there were only two sections for iy sng Riverside Deve SO 
319 players, eighty-five of whom soe. Walter J., 2102 Gerritsen Ave. 
qualified for the championship Moctman, Eirich A., 905 Convent Ave. 
Since then the sectional 


John, 
Grosstieia. y ped Ft. 
Guardaro, Edward J., 2838 


Ave., 
Hecht. 


point where twénty-seven courses ena f a 


scattered throughout the country 
were used in 1941, when the num- uayaani, fhoman ?, 8 & we lian ‘* 
ber of entries had increased to owe Te ~ Gaencts 
1,048 and the playing field in the ; L., $30 5. ce st. 
open proper to 172. wamite Drive. 
polis Country Club at 

White Plains will be the scene of 
mgt oye hn we —_ . This ' 
5 e club ‘where Paul Run 
held Sate for several years bedeee wa ‘ 3540 esr me “Suchterioney, 
he ame a jewelry salesman. - 
New York's other qualifying dis- ents Sore 1 Soncen 
trict will be Buffalo, where the “hashbe, Rveey 's ? W'ithe at 
Transit Valley Country Club will| Ssdur- Irving, Me ivington St.; Schilling, 
be the scene of action. 

Other et districts and 
courses announced by the U. 8.G.A. 
follow: 

6° Phoenia Atte Ala. 


Birmingham C 
Phoenia C. 
Virginia C. C, kes Angeies, and San Fran- 


‘ mr. . 
34 St.; tiller arg 
Wisoticn argery S 


ent Ave; Pillers- 
Plant, Marcus 


* Mil Cons: Kansas nncanalie Mo., and Belle- 


Louis. 
c of Linesin. Linestn. Neb 
Greensboro ¢ 


Oakmont ¢ cc. & Piutabura 


Seontes c. orth, 
ub, ty ‘salt Lake "Siz, 
Beattie G. Seattie, Wash. 


Discuss Amateur Event 
Headed by Francis Ouimet, one 


Utah, 


The fact that $5 caddie fees have 
already hit Long Island caused 
Frederick A. Marsh, president of 
the Long Island Golf Association, 
to call a meeting of presidents of 
clubs to see what could be done 


began/about the matter. The $5 fee is 


for a caddie carrying double, of 
course, and so far the rate has been 
in effect at only one club. Fear 
that it might spread to others 
caused the meeting to be called. 
The consensus was that §2 
should be the standard fee for tot-| -—— 
ing a single player's bag eighteen 
holes and that, although it might 
be necessary to pay $3.50 to a boy DELIGHTFUL FOR 
Honeymooners 
in JUNE at the 


carrying a double bag, the rate 
WEST GOPAKE, ‘p | | E S 


au. Y. 


Gale DECORATION DAY DAY Program 


Fer tull information NM. Y. Office TR 7-3472 
or write direct West Gopake, N.Y. 


BROWNS 


DR 


double bags. 


KINGSMEN NINE : BOWS, 2-1 


Lose to Maritime Academy in| 
Keen Pitching Battle 


A keen pitchers’ battle > oon 
Milt Sirota and Carl Braun fea- 
tured the 2-1 victory scored by the| 
New York State Maritime Acad- 
emy baseball team over Brooklyn 
College yesterday on the latter's 
diamond in Fort Schuyler, the 
Bronx. The Brooklyn College ri 
hander with two safeties, 
while Braun yielded two more and 
struck out eleven. 

The visitors tallied their only run 
in their first trip to the plate. 
Friedland got a walk and came 
home on singles by Weiser and 
Watnik. In the third session, the 


ee 


LOCH SHELDRAKE 


GUESTS ExcLesvaY 
= oe Motor Plane Direct From 
Le Guardie Field to Monticelle 


“4 2 In 25 Minutes 


The ALL-YEAR ALL cot 


KIAMESHA LAKE, Ne "Y. 


derzee drew a base on balls, was 
sacrificed to second by Smith and 
then scampered acroas the plate on 
Possavino's one-bagger. 

The Maritime Academy regis-| “rev 
tered the deciding tally in the sixth 
333! to give their southpaw twirler the 
victory. Possavino scored this 
time as he walked, went to second 


on Callahan's walk, then crossed MOTES, : 


ST REGI 


w, | Opens May 26. &. V. 6. Phone: $6 4-1068 


ofe.V 


The score by pepe 


Bkiyn College 38 
Maritime head e? 
gunhe Sane aarete “and 


Princeton Student Gets Ace 
PRINCETON, N. J., April 30 
orces- 
ter, Mass., a student at Princeton |%. ¥. Off.: BY. T-s403 
University, made a hole-in-one on|—— 

the Springdale golf course here 

today. Kearney used a No. 5 iron 

on the 195-yard ninth hole in scor- 

ing the first ace recorded this sea- 

son at the Princeton links. 


al ia 
te. 


mm 


LAURE! REL Ss a 7 

‘ has Seer) we EE. 
HR 2 i THE FALLSVIEW 
yt eg 
LAMA a 6-a270 


Mare- 
«4, house- 


OIG Mrs. H. Fiechsig. ES A 


| @ 1937 


ve J 
pone, “Tanmee S. 3 108 Riverside Brive: Green, | 1840 


| 
a 


| VACATION PARADISE Mt, al ee, 
A perfect 4 for ay Aig : orn 


P.O 7 bee N.Y. 


Decoration Weekend 
‘4 Dare, $32.50 


iin ere 


23-22 124th St College 
365 Linden Bivd.; 
Frankith 


1416 T0th St Masset, 
McNemara. Era- 

Brightwaters, 
ae 


Laviano, William V.. 
fetnt Lavrowsky, Dove A 
Lerner, Daniel S.. 175 Harrison Ave.. 
| Square Hempstead 

Marano, Luigi R 
George R. Wi Clinton Ave: 
jmett FF. 110 South Bay Ave. 
|}Milturn, Devereux Jr Route 2A, 
\Vale. L. LL: Mule, Mary J 


By The United Press. 
TALLAHASSEE, Fia., April | Jackson Heights: Mullen Katherine Cc. % a 
th Ave. Lone Island City: Murphy. Miched 


30—The State Supreme Court }. 4169 TTth St.. Elmhurst; Musicus, Raphed 
| Plaine 
Negroes from living in any par- 
| Rockwell, Jonn H 
Jonn LL, WW Cariton Road 
for violation of the country reg- 
2064 Nostrand Ave. Smith, Paul 
lative act to exclude 


Florida Righ Court Bars 
Miami Negro Segregation 


white 


Florence, 291 Berriman St Petito, 
04 Second St. Pettijohn, Julia L, 
Harrison 


1769 Bast 23d St Rosen- 
w ) 


J i774 Union &t 
ruled unanimously today that |“ jeve: ciian &. 819 Oriental Bivd 
Dade County had no authority O'Neill, Francis B.. River Park Apts.. 
to enact zoning laws, excluding | pessan 
peephn J 
2 Manhattan Ave 
ticular area of Miami. It upheld |, Roctye!. Jone ee ee 
a circuit court decision releas- |*™!n_ V.. 405 lizth st 
Sallah. David FE Piece £ 
ing two Negro families, arrested gonn kL, 0 Commen Beet, See Ramee 
Matthew 835 Clarkson Ave S\iverman, 
ulations. Emanuel M. S#1l Snyder Ave Smith Lud 
It was contended by the coun- Rockville Centre: Soy, Otte 
. 1466-22% Mth Ave. Flushing Stew 
ty that it derived authority from in iuiad £. ot 4th St). Woodelte 
Vaughan, Angela M 1470 Kast th St 
| Waldron, Charlies E 1-7 iiet Ave, 
Jamaica West, Robert W 1 
Road, Yonkers; Welling, Sibyl « 
Place; Whelan, Robert P 151 ; 
Whitney, George, Jr con Road. Old West- 
| bury 


— rom any area it chose. 
ithout passing on whether a 
law ha such an effect would 
be valid, the Supreme Court said 
that the 1937 act gave the Dade 
Board of County Commissioners 
specifically only the er to 
regulate and restrict the height 
and number of buildings, lot FOURTH DEPARTMENT 

sizes, population density and the | Bain, Helena R.. 399 B Onondaga St. Syre- 
number of junk yards and trail- (°° Ruecheler, Richard J.. @1 Wainut St. 


| Syracuse 
er camps in zoned areas. | Conway, John O., a8 W Sth St, Oewego 
| Eekher. "Robert H.. RF. D., Warners; Brana, 
~ |William G.. 371 Sanders Rd, Buffal 
Fisher, Mark EB. 99 Modge Ave. Buffalo 
Mirechmiller, Howard J.. 141 Woodridge Ave. 
Buffaio 
Tes. Ruth V 
Livadas, Dennis J 
Rochester; Lombardo 
Ave.. Buffalo 
Miller, Bradford F.. 12 Johnston St.. Senece 
Falis; Miller, Charies J.. 112 Kenwood Ave. 
| Syracuse 


e 
Rebecca, § Cornelia St O'Brien, W. Smith, 179 Geltson Ave., Brooklyn. 
COND DEPARTMENT Runals, John E.. Lewiston Heights. Lewiston, 
sa | Simon. Richard M., 158 Wesley Ave, Buflaio. 


‘ Now 
Unless otherwise indicated, the following are| NON-RESIDENT APPLICANTS 


\residents of Brookiyn 
Austern, S. Ezra, 512 Grove St.. Far Rock- ADMITTED TO MARCH. 194 
P Beatty Kohn. HMenry 2 EB @ist St New York 


way: Avner, Cari, 414 Ave M 

“‘Farbare. Gloria C.. WOT Ave 

Jonn J.. 90 Garfield Place Bissell, Ruth A Levy gi aprenee L.. S10 Standish Roed 

160 Columbia Heights Blake. Frances =F neck 

3 Park Ave. Terrace at eg Bobe. Haro Matthews William I 

Bono oratio L See! York; McGeorge, Howard D. Jr.. 

Boyarsky, Harr * Linden Bivd.:|Ave. Summit. N. J 

"88! Heniy Frank BE. Jr. 24 OW 83d @ 

A. Toon ave. 


wood; Chotiner, } =a ~, 470 East Linco 
t Vernon, Cochran, Fred £.. 3002 | Mont. lair, N. J.: Oppenheimer, Franz 


Joralemon St Cohen,| EB. 25th St.. New York 
St.; Cohn, Beverly L..! Sullivan, Arthur EB. 2 Prospect Park 
Curley, Frank E., 1360) Brooklyn 


q . a et 4th St.: Daven 

a" 3 Warwick Road, Yonkers; 
io, Cosimo, 163 Starr A Denisch 
ylor, 254 Midwood 


i] Dermody. 
7 F ber Colony, Staten island 
East sith gg ewes: Donnelly. 


Ave.: Feldman 
Irving J., 3028 
Thomas, 1 
East 


1 
ge Rodney St 
Poughs 


THIRD DEPARTMENT 


Roldman, George, M John at (ywego 
en Rosemar K Catekt) Framen@, 

| Jo sep Willard nig Main St. Cohoes 

Powers, Erma, 111 Ithaca Road. ithace 


Schilling, Joseph 
Ave: Schwarts, Daniel 
Schwarts. Irving EF i711 

Shadien, Irving C.. 224 Sulll- 
hea, Martin F. Jr. 011 Paik Ave 

Smith, Mark T. 2160 Parker &St.; Sprow 

Howard T. 415 W _ R 

Todd, Alun B., 135 E. ih St 
Walsh, z.. ze University Ave 
Woods, Alfred, 1445 Nelson Av 
Yablonsky. 


Jona ar., 185th st 
125 
Da vidgon 522 Allen St. Syracuse 

St.. 2 Southern Parkway, 
. Krnest A.. 149 Richmond 


Tees 





a6 W. 115th St. New 
119 Ashwood 
Nattier New 


Ridge | York 


O'Callaghan, Thomas A. 3 Brunewick Road 
M 


2a 
West, 


Universalists Vote Council Plea 

AKRON, Ohio, April 30 \>-~- 
‘The biennial assembly of the Uni- 
versalist Church of America voted 
today to apply again for admis- 
sion to the Federal Council of 
‘ veo’ |Churches of Christ in America. 
a, ae ren reepeie 4..( Officials said the proposal was 
HM, 06-14 th Ave, Jackson|passed “by a narrow margin” in 
jan effort to bring about Protestant 


4 cooperation based “not on theology 
Icugon  Metghts Hence. Malcie Oise i4/Dut upon social action.” Dr. Elle 
Highland Ave., Jamaica; Heuer, Theodore, 186;worth Reamon of Syracuse, N. Y, 


Ave. Sidney D. 2171 Kast 20tn st. |Was re-elected president. 


RESORTS 


Cariton | 
th st 


u ‘or 
yan r 
man, Emanuel 
wae Joseph, $10 Moward 
owa 

Pauline, 46 Island Parkway. 





Ave.: Hanealik 
Island Park:| 


- 


F Among ovr pilots are million 
milers—Regular Airline Captoins 
who have flown the world over, 


Hostess Service 
Complimentary Meals 


For Reservations and Information Cal! 


MIAMI BEACH 58-2546 NEW YORK 

758 Washington Avenve Park Central Hotel 
CABLE ADDRESS 7th Avenve & Séth Street 
AAXICO, Miami Col. 5-5182 and 5-5183 


ATLANTIC CITY—AIRPORT—-5-4634, 5-4838 


RETURN RESERVATIONS GUARANTEED 


The The PRESIDENT Anisen 


Private, Beach —§ 
_¥. OFFICE, nt 


__ TRAVEL 


The Ultimate 
in Summer Resorts 


HOLLYWOOD 


Posi 


DAILY THRU FLIGHTS 


NEW—OWNERSHIP. 
MANAGEMENT 


CAPE MAY, N. J. 


accept few guests for June arrival. 
oe for Literature. 
PENNSYLVANIA 


WEST INDIES 


DELUXE DOUGLAS AIRLINERS 
Hostess Servite + Reclining Seats 


For immediate Reservations 
Call Cl 6-0143 + Ci 6-4500 


ONIVERSAL 
AIRLINES 


HOTEL LINCOLN, Oth AVE. wl 4oth os 


I SIGHTSEEING YACHTS 


3 HOUR LECTUBED CRUISE 
AROUND MANHATTAN ISLAND 


Daily & Sunday—Foot of West dtnd St. 
6:0 A. M. and DMP. M 
LO 5.3390 BO 6.474.475 


VACATION DAYS 
ARE HERE AGAIN 


Go Burlington + Everywhere West 
———_—_—————64)200 alan 
LEGAL ADVERTISEMENTS 
| CLIEABETH EMILY SHRIMPTON, Geecased. 
Pursuant e. Trustee Act 1935 ( 

amended) 


at POCONO MANOR 


There's lots of fun at Pocono 
Manor for a grand Spring 
vacation. Golf, tennis, pic- 
nicking, fishing. Miles of 
forest trails for riding and 
hiking. Movies, dancing, 
bowling. Delicious food. 


Make reservations. 
W.¥. 1910 Roosevelt Hotel, VAnd. 6-3154 


POCONO MANOR, PENNA. 
ROBERT C. TRIER, 
U POCONO PINES, PA. ND <7 you here 
theen looking for, 3 hours from N.Y_ Barelient) 
B. RB. service, Greyhound of Marts Bus direet. | 
ae - 7000 Acre Kerort. Movern Hotel,! 
—, Beach, Tennis, oe oe of neowene 
pring Rate 
lana” Le: 5. 1530 


OPENS 
MAY 17TH 


Ollie i'w. che OL UReem | 


NIWw HAMPSHIRE 


nw. Y. 
——_ 1800 jeee & 
GOLF C eoURse 


: ¢ ~TENNIS 
/ OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOL 

Chas. M. Rousseau, Maer 

Y. Office Hotel Buckingham | 


CIrele 6-1500 


Mth day of J 
|}Administrators will distribute the deceased 8 
estate having regard only to valid pry 
then notified 
Dated this asth day of A 
CANDLER & KES ge DORE 
; Breama raw 
London. EC 4 naland 
Solicitors for the Administratore. 


NOTICE to Herman Charies Rudolf Jaco®, 

one known a6 Herman C. Jacob. that iitiga- 

concernin whereabouts, if living 

be tried » F 3 the Court ef Commons 
of Montgomery County, at Norristown, 

Curing the week of May 

14 = Any person having any knowledge of 

~jthe whereabouts of the above-famed per 
kindly edviee Gamuel D. Conver, Esquire, & 
Swede Street, Norristown, Pa 


N. 


SA 


SAFETY HARBOR_ HOTEL 


gun oat 
ah 


will 
Pleas 
Penneyivenia 


4 
on 
a. © 


, 





BUSI 


TERMINATION TASK | 
NEARLY CLEARED UP 


Rose Reports to Congress Only) 
23,900 Contracts Left to Be | 
Settled March 1 of 312,000 


NESS 


Heads New York Chapter 
Of National Credit Group 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


BEDDING INDUSTRY 
FACING SHUT-DOWN 


‘Association HeadCalls on OPA, 
CPA for Ticking Relief at Once 
to Avert Closing in 30 Days 


The New Pork Times 


Federal Reserve Eases 
Bank Holding Proposal 


By The Associated Press 
WASHINGTON, April 30— 
The Federal Reserve System 
withdrew today its request of 
Congress for legislation to 
freeze existing bank holding 
companies at their present size 
and prevent the creation of new 

bank holding companies. 
At the suggestion of Marriner 
«S. Eccles, chairman of the Fed- 


UNDERWRITERS VIE 
FOR UTILITY ISSUES 


Harriman, Ripley-Smith Group 
Wins $44,660,000 Bonds of 
Baltimore Consolidated 


37 


FINANCIAL 3 


SHUT-DOWN IS NEAR, 
‘US. STEEL WARNED 


d 
‘Olds Says Plants Will Close in 
| 20 to 30 Days Unless the 

Coal Walkout Ends 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


Sharp Drop Follows Restoration 
| Of Free Market in Treasury Bonds 


Big Board Lifts 8-32 Fluctuation Limit an 
Biggest Turnover Since War Ensues— 
Over-Counter Dealers Follow Suit 


A free market in United States; formally arranged eight thirty-sec-| 
Government bonds was re-estab- onds limit of fluctuation which) 


eral Reserve Board, Representa- 
tive Spence of Kentucky, Chair- 
man ofghe House Banking Com- 
mittee, introduced a substitute 
bill. . The revised bill would per- 
mit new holding companies to 
come into existence and also the 
expansion of existing companies 
by acquisition of stock or assets 
of banks if the board found this 
would not be detrimental to the 
public interest. 

A statement from the Reserve 
Board said: “In its revised bill 
the board has recommended that 
Congress treat bank holding 
companies in much the same 
manner as it has dealt with 
banks themselves.” 


OWN STRIKE COSTS SHOWN 


BIG SALES MADE ABROAD MANY PLANTS NOW IDLE INTEREST COST IS 2.59% 


Scranton Electric Preferred 
and Common Stocks Go to 
Mellon-Smith Barney 


Placed at 50 to 100 in Nation 
—Offers 4-Point Action Plan 
Also to Ask Congress Aid 


$345,000,000 Is Realized on 
Items Costing $1,028,000,000 
—Other Agency Action 


Specia; to Tus New Yorx Towns Competitive bidding by under- 


Thomas J. O’Brien 


Stucke Make Selection Advance, | 
Ignoring Action of U. S. Bonds 


ADOPTS NEW PLAN 


Old Formula for 
Reyamping Abandoned and 
Another Is Approved 


| 


| 


mercial model alone, it was 
ed out, requires eighty-eigh 


n 
r 
ll de- 


bh 
the 





Continued on Page 45, Column 2 
—SPECIALISTS IN= 


United States 
Government 


PENSION AND 


| MARKET AVERAGES 


Tuesday, April 30, 1946 


sTOCcKsS 


. Lew, Last, 
25 rallroads ... 49:96 4040 49.78 
25 industrials .......234.28 232.43 233.60 
50 stocks 142.12 140.96 141.60 


DAILY BANGE OF 50 STOCKS 
29 . 52 140.24 141.18 
40.15 140 


PLANS 


We invite you to discuss 
the formulation and 
finaricing of an employee 
benefit plan for your par- 
ticular case—without ob- 
ligation. 


THE CHASE 
NATIONAL BANK 


OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK 





Continued on Page 39, Column 3 


Securities 


“THE DAY IN 


33 


bespes 


C. J. DEVINE a CO. 


INC. 
48 WALL STREET, NEW YORK 5, N.Y 


OT 
. -- 143.45 141.93 100% — 
MONTHLY BANGE OF STOCKS 
High Dete. Low. Date. Last. 
144.15 17 137.19 141, 


23 
b3205 


S82z2c8e sz5 


Chicago Boston : Philodelphia -Pittsburgh 
St. Levis 


we -_ 
BS 
3 


BEERESES 


Penson Tiust Divisson 
11 Broad Street, New York 15 Cleveland - Cincinnati 


Telephone H Anover 2-9800 


San Francisco 


++? + 
-e 


96.08 Jan. 
68.34 Jan. 
78.54 Jan. 
. 79.97 Junez7 
72.30 Dec. 10 
67.11 Mar 22 
68.80 Sept. 1 
68.39 Mar. 3) 
DOW-JONES STOCK AVERAGES 


High. Low. 
201.23 205.53 


64 
43.57 43.10 43.4 


UAWNESSS BoE 

SeSSRSEE BEES 

wasissse 528 

SSeseees 3! 
es 


+! 
~ 


E 


28 


For Banks and Brokers 


-. 

am 

i 3 
~ 


eee 


E 


lished here yesterday with removal| "8d — ‘ ~ bg tina 
of an informal war-time restric~| oP 543. "The Stock Muchange wes| 
tion which had Jimited — fluc-| not a party to the agreement, al-| 
tuations to $2.50 for each $1,000/ though prices in that relatively in- : 
— jog aguend or downward) active A e-news never had fluctuat.|LOSSeS Put at $27,887,000 in 
TOER Une Preveews Cay 6 Sess. ed outside of the dealer-agreed ae 
both ininna tei range since it had been in ettect.| Report on First Quarter 
. Other prices on the Exchange ivi 
of trading in the long-term Victory) quickly were adjusted to the new) Board Votes Dividends 
2‘ per cent issue in the normally| situation and dealers in the out- icaieeaetie 
Virtually all i i 4 inactive Stock Exchange marketiside market found themesives! pou 
WASHINGTON, April 30—All tt yeaa. paper, etic pe writing syndicates yesterday for — oa = gery quoting prices well above those on| Immediate costs of ° — 
but 23,900 of the 312,000 prime soft construction mattress fac- | public utility securities resulted as an Be em 0 do the Big Board. Business poured| week steel strike in January an 
contracts terminated since the be- tories will be forced to suspend follows: For Sita the ‘tetiheineneetnte the listed market and the Ex- February to the United States 
ginning of war production’ re- operations within thirty days un- Consolidated Gas, Electric |... aaear virtual suspended trad.|cnanse volume for the day in'steel Corporation were $27,887,000, 
mained on March 31 to be settled.) Thomas J. O’Brien of the Electro|!¢88 the Office of Price Adminis- Light and Power Company of ling after a ae took sanael pt a vee t totaled ig engoey without allowance for loss of busi- 
according to the seventh quarterly /Metallurgical Sales Corporation,|tration and the Civilian Produc- Baltimore—$44,660,000 of twen- |. the Exchange near the noon] tn, S 066 orig terd It ness as a result of the shut-down, 
sop br itted cee an today ected President of the New|tion Administration take “imme a wat pe n Ri oe |hour involving $100,000 tace| wee Tes Rienest bustoces in Treas- Irving S. Olds, chairman, an- 
pone Submitted to Congress today/York Chapter, National Institute|diate action” to alleviate the acute nds; Harriman Ripley & Co., | mount of the Victory 2%s at 103,|uries since the $22,292,000 which nounced yesterday after the quar- 
By H. Chapman Rose, director of|of Credit, at a meeting of that or-| sh of ticking. I Wei Inc., and Alex. Smith & Sons, compared with the previous night’s| 292, conte anaaannaradt aemanemnes = Sees 
Semrest eottioments. ganization last night in its head-\riegs, “president of. the National high bidders, designating an in- |¢io90 of 103 16/32, violating an in-| Continued om Page 41, Column? | dition. the corporation already has 
In the first quarter of this year,|quarters, 354 Fourth Avenue. He ° ., in . Beddi e ages a terest rate of 2\% pe cent and ’ ° ~ a tenaee tam af whet Gutaee 
the report continued, more than|succeeds Albert H. Walters of t sass oo of ron masemeeedl an interest cost of 2.59 per cent. , mas ied thirty-day coal strike 
37,000 terminated contracts in-|Prentice-Hall, Inc. Sol Soloway, ee eee aie nm fift The bid was 103.5534. still in progress, and will have to 
volving canceled commitments of|J. A. Deknatel & Son, Inc.. was Y y Scranton Electric Company— | ; ai . thi 
. : and 100 plants throughout the na- cease all steel production within 
$9,700,000,000 were settled. elected first vice president; Samuel tion, which might be classified as 53,248 shares of new $100 cumu- twenty to thirty days if that strike 
Disposals Abroad A. Dawson, Meinhard, Greeff &)\ar¢¢ an and small. have lative preferred stock and 1,214,- parte Mame voaye F 
Congress also received 2 report |Co., Inc., William J. Jantzen, Bank shut ‘down mee Yor og or “only r 000 shares of $5 par value com- The dinesters dectased the rege 
on the disposition of surplus war of Manhattan Company and Ed-|«very few” roducers have tickin mon stock; the preferred award- lar quarterly dividend of $1.75 « 
property abroad. The State. De-|ward Knaus, National Credit Of-|inventories adequate to maintain Tentative ed to a group headed by Mellon Th . . tose ateatind ace tual anane on the speieel aaah, Ou 
partment, through its foreign|fice, Inc., vice president; Thomas} wore than e seaaaie eutuut Securities Corporation at an in- e stock market yesterday elected generaily to ignore the uae Ber te sheen: a 
liquidation commissioner, Thomas|F. Goldrick, Federation Bank and| “The ticking shestaas te the terest cost of 3.35 per cent, and flurry of trading in Government bonds, prices of which broke ».0.4 May 3, and a dividend of $1 
ealinnd $505.00) toe fern uit bas|Trust Company, secretary:  &2dlbeqding industey,” he declared, “1a the common to a group headed (sharply on the Stock Exchange, and, unlike last week, negotiated a share on the common stock, pay- 
realized $345,000,000 from the sale|James A. Stack Jr., J. P, Maguire) que entirely to fa‘lure of OPA and jointly by Mellon Securities Cor- | 2 ‘ : , sate ten Oh ts liane Of Genene 
of surplus property costing $1,028,-|& Co., treasurer. CPA to take any ection Whatever poration and Smith, Barney & & selective rise. Again there were some wide price alterations, May 10. Holders of the commen 
ee: 1 —————— ion recommendations made jointly Co., on a bid of $21.319, ‘and, while the composite pricef}———————— — | stock received the same amount in 
Property whose original cost The board of directors of the| Sale of the Consolidated Gas 1 : : 
was by bedding and ticking industry edged forward about ' point, previous quarters. 
$3,521,000,000 has been de- representatives at a meeting in American Woolen Company has|bonds brought forth interest cost lightly better { "Despite the strike results and 
Gared surplus overseas and made Washington on April 16.” : labandoned the tentative plan of|bids of 2.62 per cent, submitted by there was a slightly better in- ‘ne aneenk colina, tha aeumenee 
available to the FLC, Mr. McCabe oe, Wehebate ~) are recapitalization involving the issu- White, Weld & Co., and First Bos-|crease in the industrial averages. Sten eran able 2 chew om tana 
gpa tay egy n pect pene recommendations designed to pro-jance of debentures that was dis-|t0" Corporation, and 2.63 per cent, /Steels led the way in the final f j of $10,238,271 for the first quarter 
in addition to this property, po- ‘vide bedding producers with in- nese = as submitted by Halsey, Stuart & Co., hour, when quotations reached of “this year by withdrawing $16,- 
tential surplus remaining unde- creased ticking supplies as fol- c at the annual meeting of|tno gubject to clearance of the ’ q 787.600 tram Seseree “fer Gath 
clared as of March 31 exceeded lows: stockholders in March, and yester-|Securities and Exchange Commis- the best levels of the session. ‘ated edtittanall cnaiy eotainm ont 
oe anaes 1—Granting of an immediate |4ay it approved a new plan calling | sion, eae ay ene There was little change in the er manene of war.” The latter figure was 
n his report on contract ter- : a for an exchange of new preferred Brown ns syndicate wilt make) Bi reached by applying to the $27,- 
minations Mr. Rose advised Con-|Aviation Interests Urge Action,| ine OPA’ to ticking producers |stock for wld ee ithe offering to the public later in/Pace Of business on the S'S Rouse Tells Mortgage Bankers ss7.000 strike costs the $11,150,000 
gress that of the total of $64,400,-| ' ’| who would ship output to mat- , the week at 104% to yield 2.55 per Board, where transfers again 7 sescclated yedestion tm tauen Bar” 
000,000 of commitments canceled) Particularly on Own Needs | tress plants to overcome diver- |, Moses Pendleton, president, said) cent. ‘were about 1,000,000 shares. of Possible Trouble From = anie, Mr. Olds reported. 
since the beginning of war pro-; . : sion of ticking to denim and it is hoped that a special meeting} Bidding for the Scranton Elec-| Continuing to receive major at- ; peep ty ec 
duction, $42,000,000,000 of which) iN Metals, Textiles, Parts other products to which the 5 |0f stockholders can be held late in tric stock elicited five bids for the tention, news concerning the coal Inflated Appraisals ax ance 
was pending on V-J Day or termi- per cent applies. June to act on the new program, |preferred and three for the com- strike and possible OPA changes | In addition, the company entered 
nated since then, $24,300,000,000 2-—Cancellation or lowering of |and that detailed provisions of the|™0n. Interest costs designated in| were carefully scrutinized in Vro- on its first-quarter account a credit 
remained unsettled on March 31 the entage of ticking ear- P bidding for the preferred ranged kerage circles. Effects of the —_ é | of $6,800,000 in order to distribute 
last. The War Assets Administration he for export, held at 15 plan will be contained in a proxy) +40, Mellon's low of 3.343 per cent |strike have already become visible| Repeated warnings were given ...- the whole of 1946 the income 
Acts on Steel Plates, Shapes |°"U/4 speed up the distribution of) 1» cent since 1944. statement to be mailed to stock-/t, @ high of 3.448 per cent. Bidding|/in many ways, and more serious|yesterday before the Mortgage taxes estimated to be payable this 
surplus materials, particularly 3—Granting of permission by holders in the near future. for the common ranged from the! disruptions have been forecast un-|Bankers Association of America|/year. This was deemed advisable 
At the same time the Office of|those suitabie for use in aviation the CPA to the bedding industry The plan provides for authoriza-|¢9; 319 per share high dollar bid less a settlement results this week. against their taking advantage of | “to prevent a possible distortion in 
Price Administration lifted price/ manufacturing, a spokesman for a| to have available gra oods {tion of a new class of $4 cumula- o¢ welion and Smith, Barney to a| The stock market exhibited firm Government-eased loans on hous-|operating figures for subsequent 
control over fabricated structural) 445 of Bast coed ies| printed in mattress cathouns tive convertible prior preference iow of $20.60, It is understood that|tendencies at the opening, with|ing to saddle veterans with homes quarters of 1946, when operations 
steel shapes and plates formerly group oan, companies rather than restricting its entire stock, which will be offered in ex-\+n, preferred will be re-offered pivotal issues on slightly higher|they cannot afford and must sub- may be of a more normal charac- 
covered by the maimum price reg-| Meeting yesterday in the Hotel usage to gray goods only jchange to holders of present pre- ister this week at 101.50 to yield ground and Armour the feature sequently lose ter,” Mr. Olds said. 
ulation. The types affected are Roosevelt declared. He emphasized 4—-Prohibition of the use of ferred stock, on which arrears to- 3.30 per cent, and the common ation a transfer of 3,700 shares. That practices of “loose ap-| The reported income was equal 
those used in such structures ag| that the industry continues to face all woven ticking for purposes jtal $58.50 a share, on the basis of'¢90 50 subject to clearance by the There was little change in the pat- praisal” of high-priced real estate to 45 cents a share for the com- 
buildings, bridges, erected storage) Shortages of such essential metals) - +)... than bedding. its original 122 Shares of new stock and $8.50/<.-urities and Exchange Commis-|tern for the rest of the morning,were prevalent throughout the mon stock, after preferred divi- 
pas ond comvever towete. joo unions Gnd enpeet, textile! use ~_ . in cash for each old preferred) .:., jalthough the coppers strengthened|country was indicated by the seri- dends. After the regular preferred 
Fabricated products and serv-/fabrics and parts for planes, and) y7° woisciass said no word had|*hare with its right to accrued : ‘as much as a point near mid-day.ousness with which practically dividend, of $1.75 a share and the 
ices covered by other price regu-|speedier distribution of Govern-|. on received from either agency|vidends. UTILITY BOND OFFERING  |Gimbel featured the store sharesjevery speaker discussed the sub- usual common dividend of $1 a 
lations remain under control, OPA|ment-owned merchandise would since the meeting and that the The new prior preference stock and Park & Tilford, among the|ject, and by a particularly stern'share voted yesterday by the 
= ald the mdustry materially. situation now ~y* serious that|W!!! have no par value, will be en-|Utah Power and Light Issue Will) jjquors, received a sharp lift. address of an MBA official who|board, surplus was reduced by $4,- 
Other announcements included:| It was pointed out that there beddi uf titled to $105 a share in voluntary Geo on Market Today American Woolen attained its|cautioned his audience that the re- 769,900. In the first quarter of 
TOYS: Parts that into the mak-/|®re apparently large stores of ma- ng ne etn tah ve a or $100 in involuntary liquidation, “ Tes previous high of 60%, but soon sponsibility lay with the mortgage|1945 income .was $15,379,171, or 
~ E all toys land’ games, except terials for aviation manufacture Seton tha toe es and will be convertible at any time; The First Boston Corporation| tumbled 8 points on tee solensel bankers. $1.04 per cutunen chase, ont the 
control OPA, effective Soonassow. on in tor ye support of department and furni- into two common shares. Subject/and other underwriters we vee et the proposed recapitalization| The speeches were part of the balance after dividends was $371,- 
Ceilings also were lifted from minia.| “© Country ich are not MOV-!+ 6 stores “since it is obvious that|t? Such conversion rights. the pres-|to the public today $32,000, of) plan as traders attempted to esti- closing session of a two-day meet- 000. In the final quarter of 1945 
ture gasoline engines for model air- | ng to industry as rapidly as the no retail stor ll a bed ent common stock will remain un-/Utah Power and Light Company) mate the value of the common un- ing of the association at the/profit was 80 cents a common 
Se beeen ene = of one-| companies would like to see. Some athe wittneus tk uaniiioan” room changed. first mortgage 24% per cent bonds der its terms. A little irregularity, Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. share. 
of miniature engines. not wool tel eee ee also believe there One of the largest ‘ mattress Creation of the new prior prefer-|of 1976 at 101.50. The syndicate) ser jn during the early afternoon,| Raymond M, Foley, commission-| The reserve fund drawn upon to 
toys, remain under price control. are still substantial quantities of plants, which was producing at 80 ence stock and of additional com-fwon the award of the issue OM put then activity waned to extremeler of the Federal Housing Admin-|counter the effect of the steel 
OLIVES: Increases in processors’ materials which have never been per cant of its pre-war rate three|™0" shares to provide for its con-|Monday at competitive sale. The| quijiness. A revival of buying injistration, urged the mortgage strike stood at about $40,000,000 
by OF of 25 to 8 per cent were set | dec! ye ty me ing ks ’ version will require a two-thirds'Securitiés and Exchange Commis-'the ¢inal hour snapped the market/bankers to cooperate with the on March 31, compared with $100,- 
eee ane Spanien olives. oe WAA can do nothing ar at here now a vote of each present class of stock. sion yesterday released jurisdiction | pack, and irregularly higher prices Government in its housing loan 000,000 accumulated from 1941 to 
for green Spanish los ee ~ - them until they are declared giass. Lesther in’ the heavy po Consummation of the plan will de-|over the sale. were posted at the close. policies, saying that the future of/1944 inclusive. The * corporation 
sued. Retail price increases were|’ ume class, has eliminated at least|Pend upon deposit for exchange of/ Proceeds of the financing will be} United States Steel, which de-\the building industry depended charged $35,584,069 to this re- 
Given (20 about © cents for the| cme vernon er, the scarcity ofl, soft cons a larger percentage of the pre-|used toward redemption of $38|clared the regular dividend after|on it serve in 1945 for final amortiza- 
seven-ounce container of Manszilias|#/uminum among aviation com-|~"Te® lines in its truction ferred stock, such percentage to/500,000 of 3% per cent bonds ofthe close of the market and re- " »  |tion of emergency wartime facili- 
and 11 cents for plain Queen olives, es, it was explained, is that|PToduction, he said. be determined by the directors.|1968 and $5,000,000 of 6 per cent! ported earni eh amen Responsibility on Lender’ she 4 eh rf . 
FOOTWEAR: Revocation of Gov-| the He assailed OPA for its failure y 7 wee bendelin arnings 0} COUSS BENATE! §=riccusmae the GI Bill of Rights,|, 886 CNnet ~Gmaier =cuargee 
ernment controls over shoe produc- to issue any interim relief to tick-|\When the plan becomes effective debentures of 2022. The new for the March quarter, against x Vint wweetie oj were made to this account in 1945 
tion (with the alternative that the ing manufacturers pending a defi-|'t is expected that dividend ac-\are redeemable at 104%4 untilisi04 a year ago, added 1% point|"¢ emphasized the “staggering re- 1.4 preceding years. 
controls be suspended if the revoca- ite decisi 4 felt & inced|cruals on any unexchanged pré-| April 30, 1947, and at declining|net after an extreme rise of 114. sponsibility on the lender” and First-quarter losses were $13,- 
tion is found not to be feasible) was ane ghinmente sail) soe |ferred stock will be paid and that prices thereafter. A sinking fund/Republic had a similar peak in-|Predicted that “in few years” the so) 746 before making the eredits 
SPA. dodewtan a mendel totey by |newent shapes Gad venstion, sonny eggenn Nhe ig sea gf tender ll be initiated on the be rative in 1958 as d ied with a |sentiment for providing housing 4). . es 
OPA following a meeting with the|need for this vast variety of t tinue to go into denim, garments, dividends wi oes S will become ope ibe —waee Sae Gaee th a net of ap t » be reversed “if Ucscribed. Products and services 
advisory committees of aluminum. it w ya Pe to pocket linings of work clothes, lin-|c°mmon stock, Mr. Pendleton said./ With this financing, capitaliza- point. Other steels were firm but/f0r veterans may be reversed i! said in the quarter were $265,856,- 
AUTOS: OPA acted to facilitate! sponsible tor thei tnabétite ® re- ings of low-end suitcases F The debentures refunding plan/tion will consist of $11,300,000 of little changed in price. American |*t that time veterans be: ago 7ST, against $491,085,.137 the year 
sales by manufacturers and resellers | Goi; 2 ae ae th oducts instead of discussed in March was found upon| bank loans and 1,185,241 shares of/Woolen, the second most active|their homes” and peopl: w ag, Wane: uateniien caaienal 
of passenger cars for special or lim- oe re gyri gn and some Leo alll psa yes “ecompt Fn BS ne further study to be subject to pos-|common stock. ‘issue on 14,700 shares, reduced its)mand: “Who failed to prote: rity taxes and pensions cost 
of getting maxinoues oritee ones ee re as much as tweive|s given the ticking producers that sible tax uncertainties and other Underwriters associated in the| early loss of & points by half|Vveteran ? ho took advantage ©. «147 872,993, against $233,011.518 
The change will not affect sales of Spokesmen predicted that they can profitably produce mat- disadvantages, and was abandoned,/offering are: Blyth & Co., Inc.;/while the preferred gained 3)his need? _ |products and services bought cost 
reguiar models. Affected are direct aviati ind P . . at .the tress tickings.” he declared. Eastman, Dillon & Co.; Glore, For-| points. Like other speakers on the pro- 61149 gg 951, against $188.613,992, 
sales by manufacturers to individuals | * on industry would consume . gan & Co.; Goldman, Sachs & Co.;| Gimbel Brothers, at a new peak/gram, Commissioner Foley pointed ..4 depletion, depreciation and 
abroad, sales of unfis to be resoid| "ree to four times as much alu-| _CPA was criticized by Mr. Weis- , Inc.: Kid-| + + lout that because of low interest|*' Li » Gop 
te the Government and sales involv-|minum in t-war production of|!as8 for requiring that all gray LOCKHEED REPORT HELD UP Harriman Ripley & Co., Inc.; jof 64%, rose 3 and Macy's, also ai amortization were $11,985,905. 
ing less than twenty-five units to be! civili i 4 oods purchased by beddin . “ der, Peabody & Co.; Mellon Securi-jat a fresh high, advanced 11.\rates on loans and the great avail~\, inst $32 280,858. Interest was 
resold t an and military planes as in|® P y & man . h, Barney &|The copper stocks frac-\ability of money for lending, the 
@ through all resellers in thisithe pre-war he ufacturers—and he admitted that i Meeti to Be Put Off) ties Corporation; Smith, y &) pper stocks rose from frac y 
sone tion een wee Sneees gray goods is in good supply under Annua os ~ Co.; Stone & Webster Securities tions to a point in Kennecott. Du|pressure for houses was resulting} Continued on Page 43, Column 1 
1939 averaged 23. 000,000 pounds, CPA Tesuiations be utiles with- Until It Is Ready Corporation; Union Securities Cor- Pont extended its rally by 2 points. = meee po A veterans on in- 
9 pe: , rting small ye ration; White, Weld & Co.; Blair|Best strength in the tobaccos/fiated real estate prices. 
uanctactare ait ered my rey 6 x. be rr * Robert E. Gross, president o the E Co. Inc.; Coffin & Burr, ntlahemed in Philip Morris, General} He added that despite the in- 
The aviation industry, accordi er cull cing of a thal rae Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, rn Harris, Hall & Co., Inc.; F. 8.|Cigar and American Tobacco.|flated market on existing loans the 
to representati wants th he | explained but added that “the|nownced at Los Angeles yesterdayiviseiey & Co.; Paine, Webber, Park & Tilford was run up 4%%/|volume of FHA loans was still 
ves, wan e alu- , »|that the annual report.of the com-| jy, ..50n & Curtis; Shields & Co.; points to a new top of 84, but only|great, but that the authority for 
oma ot ot ta cea — ted. ticking & pany would not be ready in tim@inicker, Anthony & Co.; The Wis-|retained 214 points. ithem would expire on ‘July 1. Con- 
| n amount of their output for re el prin Be n.g} erred by for.the annual meeting on May 7, consin ‘Company; A. G. Becker &| The rails were generally up|tinued authority for these loans, he 
| Continued on Page 44, Column? (CPA cet. se forbidden BY| which will be adjourned until the Co., Inc.; Central Republic Co.,/fractions, with a few wider gains./said, is written in the Wagner- 
SEE : statement is ready. In an interim)... Laurence M. Marks & Co.;| American Airlines receded % point /Taft-Ellender bill. 
| : report, he said the company had 8 whiting, Weeks & Stubbs; Dean in trading, which reached 13,900) James W. Rouse, chairman of 
backlog of $199,739,000, including! witter @ Co.; Edward L. Burton|shares. Strongest units in their/the MBA's GI loan committee, de 
$55,430,000 of Constellations and & Co.; Hayden, Miiler & Co.; J. A.| respective divisions were Standard|clared that “appraisal practices 
$144,300,000 of military orders. | Hogle & Co.; G. H. Walker & Co.; Oil of India, U. S. Rubber and/have become so loose in some com 
He added that the company ' : waa veale 
planned “an aggressive entrance”) Continued on Page 39, Column 4 Continued on Page 40, Column + 
into the field of personal flying) —— = —=—=—_= : —___- 
“when certain basic problems have ; 
Date. been solved.” The company is de-/T'() PJ CS OF WALL STREE] 
une 26 veloping a gas turbine engine of ts lands Se cere 5 aca 
YEARLY RANGE OF ts INDUSTRIALS (high horsepower and has ente a | 
Jom Date, Low. Date Last into a ounatng agreement With bl [the story carried in the March/Flectric Corporation, already have 
51 Apr. 17 210.60 Feb. 26 233.60 , Proxy Problem company’s house or-|asked merchants to put into effect, 
224.76 Dec. 11 175.77 Jan. 24 219.77\the Menasco Manufacturing Vom- issue of the compan} I 
osensTs ny for production of this engine,| Stockholders who discard proxyican, “Around the System,” the/on a voluntary |! sis, the wartime 
20 Rails so tae ' ry Comb “ » hems ‘jmaterial might be inclined to CONn-| mechanical assistance of sorting, “brown-out.” Unless coal is re- 
103.47 —.02 101.66 —.08 100.81 —i1 102.35 —.06 wid sider it important information aqdressographing, stamping and/ceived within a week, the company 
DAILY RANGE OF DOMESTIC BONDS ‘HEADS NETHERLANDS BANK Wren they learn of the magnitude | other machines was used. Nor did| says it will have to start rationing 
Apr. 29...102.41 = 08) Apr. 25...102.02 ~ 26) of the job which confronted a tyPi-|the job end there. Follow-up ma-|May 10, The company has on hand 
Abr: 30.. 308.18 + islam BH = rt na leal large corporation recently in|terial was sent to stockholders) enough coal to operate only until 
YEARLY RANGE OF DOMESTIC BONDS Dr. M. W. Holtrop Succeeds Dr. the distribution of such material. who failed to reply by a date in|May 77, In the New York metro- 
on. . 10357 Apr. 9 201.99Jan. 2 10235) LL. J. A. Trip, Now Director (In connection with furnishing advance of the meeting, necessi-| politan area concern becomes more 
101.16 Apr. 24 98.08 Jan. 101 07 scans proxy forms and statements to tating advance preparation of!rrave with the dwindling supply 
191.97 THE HAGUE, April 30 (Aneta)/ 153,000 stockholders for a special “nudging” letters and the corol-|necessa‘y to maintain operations 
—Shareholdors of the Bank of the|meeting, the Consolidated Edison jar cf the subway systems. Charles P 
08.4) Netherlands meeting in Amster-|Company utilized the services of Cross, chairman of the Board of 
8.41}dam today appointed Dr. L. J. A./some eighty employes in two de- May Markets ' -ansportation, said four days ago 
fea! TTip, who resigns the presidency|partments who packed bulky, out-) q that subway service might Se oem 
73.86 of the bank tomorrow, to the board|size envelopes into 261 postoffice| Speculators are superstitious an , . ; 
pe tailed by the end of this month 
2.08) of directors. The new president of/mail sacks which, when weighed it is not unsual for them at the aaa 
the banx wiil be Dr. M. \W. Hol-|for mailing, tipped the scales at/end of @ month to — og _, 
trop, former managing director of|eight and a half tons. Incidental to ords in an effort to find out w 
fhe Royal Dutch blast furnaces and|the human element involved in pre-| the new month might bring forth— 
steel factories at Ymuiden. tolif anything. Well, the record for 


-—- 


E. W. Bliss Company* 


Summary of the Day 
; $2.25 Convertible Preferred 


industrials 
railroads 


sznske 
Pitt tots 


Corporation 3 rar 
bs utilities 


stocks 1. 7712 76.47 76.90 


c 
° 


TREASURY STATEMENT 
WASHINGTON, April I - - pete a bagel Goose of business April 3. 


RECEIPTS 
This Month Corr. Period Fiscal Fees. 


Last Year ‘ Pisce 
$2,617,027. 331 $36,.316,810,804 $38 


AN ANALYSIS 


Corr, Period 
al Yr. 1045 
075,194,153 


| 
| 


| Total . - 


| Income 2 
Withheld by amgtovers (Current 
Tex Payment Act of 1943) 
Other 
Miscellaneous internal revenue 
Employment taxes 
| Customs 


Available to interested investors 
upon eritten request | 


Abraham «& Co. 


Established 1916 
| Members New York Stock Exchange 
Members New York Curb Exchange 


120 Broadway, New York § 


427 201.670 
1,047 771,508 
572,338,973 
37 514,028 
39 986 062 


EXPENDITURES 
$3,577,515,224 $6,94+.575.016 


32,320,113 
220,472,224 
MA 


2,139,810,910 


| Total expeoditures (excluding 
publie retirements) 
Principe! Items 
Security Board 
erest on publis debt 
| Veterans’ Administration 
War activities (subtotal) 
of expenditures (excluding 
public debt retirements) 1,321,731. 307 4.357, 528,060 19, 751,326,307 
Gross public debt, $273,750 703,842: years $234 555 938,451, 
Monetary gold. §20.252,072.492 Pad age $20,373,601,536. 
Treasury balance, $21,026,635,653.61. 


372,221,715 
23,505 515,404 
738,702,814 
73,212,508,258 


43, 548,553,845 


6.315.971.4581 


The charekolders’ meeting also 
authorized the directors to pay a 
3% per cent dividend for 1945 
when the Netherlands bank's 
claims azainet Germany have been 
“regularize 1.” 


Railroad Plans Refunding 

WASHINGTON, April 30 \P— 
The Nashville, Chattanooga & St. 
Louis Railway asked the Interstate 
Commerce Commission today for 
authority to issue $15,000,000 of 
Series B bonds to aid in the re- 
demption of a like amount of first- 
mortgage Series A 4 per cent 
bonds, due on Feb. 1, 1978. It said 
it believes the new bonds could be 
sold at a maximum interest rate 
of 3 per cent. The Louisville & 
Nashville Railroad Company asked 
authority to assume liability as 
guarantor for the bonds. 


paring the material, according 


the last five years shows that May 
markets have advanced. In 1940, 
however, the bottom fell out of it 
jwhen the Germans invaded the 
|Low Countries, and back to and 
lincluding 1929, declining markets 
4 prevailed in most of the years. All 
~ a. |Of which bears out the old saw 
+ \% |that speculation is not an exact 
iscience, even though we are now 
in the fifth year of a bull market. 


Forebodings 
Portending drastic 


Stock Exchange Leaders 


Net 
Cher 
- * 


Volume 


Comwith & Sou. 24,800 
Am Woolen ....14,700 
Am Alirlines ...13,900 
N Y Central.... 


+ % 
+1 

+ % 
+1% 
" ® 


+% 


Sun Chem 

Baldwin Loco .. 
Stand Oil Ind.. 
Gar Wood Ind.. 
Socony-Vac ..... 
Tex Pac Ld Tr. 


effects 


month-old coal strike ends soon, 
the electric light and power com- 
|panies privately are voicing alarm 
jand publicly are forecasting im- 
a ‘ “ew New i minent announcement of power 
lasues vances clines Highs Lows | . 
Yesterday ..982 457 324 65 10 (curtailment for display signs and 
April 20.....947 408 335 50 11 /Store windows. Some companies, 


April 27.....817 472 173 44 


Int Nickel Can. +% 


(throughout the nation unless the) 


8 |jsuch as the Rochester Gas and) 


Stock Exchange 
Stocks improved selectively 
and closed irregularly higher in 
dullest se&Ssion of the month; 

volume, 1,000,000 shares. 
Treasury issues off sharply in 
largest dealings since Septem- 
ber, 1939; other bonds quiet and 
mixed; transactions, $11,960,000 

Curb Exchange 


Stocks irregular; 450,000 shares 
traded 
Bonds steady $310,000 


Foreign Exchange 


"Prospectus on Request 


Northern States Power 
Company (Del.) 


7% Cumulative Preferred 
6% Cumulative Preferred 


| 
| 
| 


Bought—Sold—Quoted 


SuTRO Bros. & C0. 


Members New York Stock Lachenge 
120 Broadway, New York § 
Telephone Rictor 2-7340 


sales, 


Rates were firm on light deal- 
ings. 
Commodity Futures 
Mixed price trend, with May 
rye and oats rallying, while cot- 
ton continued lower 





FINANCIAL : THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. STOCK EXCHANGE 


————|_- TRANSACTIONS ON THE NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE 


Range 1946. Stock and Range 1946, Stock and Div’d Sis. Net | Range 1946. Stock and Div'd Sis. Net 


Diva Sis. Chge ed 
High, Low. im Dollars. _ 100s. one ae aici y. ap High, Low. im Dollars 1 i te Lom High. Low. in Dollars, 108s. First. High. Low. Last. Chge 
“TS 61 ABBOT LAB 17 a © ted Date Tie 65 Hercules Powder. 65¥y 6S _GSvp— Val liye OipPac Tin Com... 8 9 % 9 Wy. Bought - Sold - Quot 
19 15 ACF-Brill Mot .. Bay's —eveur o 139 130 Hercules P pf Si ab 1ST 187013 15a .. | Ly 9g Packard Mot 159 4 My Mp Me 985 
Sales Monday Year Ago 1046 15 9 £82 Hershey Choc 3 a + i%) 27 =. Wy Pan Am Airw Vee TS 205% 2034 203_ 20% 


4 146% 135 Hersh Ch aaites to8 140V 139% 1 | | 20% 17 Pan Am Petrol.dde 2 19% 19% 19%, 1959+ 
1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,830,000 142,695,422 127,370,468 46% * Nt et XT ne . te 4 Hn ie ‘a d i inet 


55% 55% 
asezzzre : Pais a ce ge Fe a a a te on ot yt Ly Alaska Airlines 
| sey Dy, 8 
yt : Nend-Heren of 3G sant sh ae in va American Boxboard 
Set | ee rome, Boe 3 : 


THE VALUE OF Experience IN MOVING 
LARGE BLOCKS OF SECURITIES 


53°3 
Al 


35 
e°8*5Eete 
ere 
++ 


Exp .659. 
bY Adams-Millis le. 
319% Addressog-Mult 1 


tt 
35° 


—_ ot 


bh successful disposal of blocks of securities 
usually requires extensive facilities plus the 
valuable quality of experjence. 

We have been closely associated with secondary 
distributions for many years and with special offer- 
ings since their inception. This provides us with 
that invaluable sense of timing and “know bow” 
that are of definite advantage in disposing of blocks 
of securities of all types and sizes for institutions, 
estates or large private investors. 

Whether you have occasion now to seek such 
services or expect to require them in the future, one 
of our executives specializing in such distributions 
would be glad to undertake to assist you. Related 
consultations are, of course, strictly confidential. 


= 


er 
—— 


> 
TF * 


$i (JC) 


"it 19% 
1m Pete ee 2 Do | Crowell-Collier 


Be 

++ +14! 

ee Ps 
'F 

“33 


3°32 


Bos=*y-sgceresy Sesto cceesgys 
usgsaceye 


7 


#7 
! 
SS * 3 suse ¢ 5058 os 


rs 
* 
# 


é 


F 


zees3 


sebsbeses *3°3*2335 


S555 55S TFFF5F 
FE 
2 
£_~* 


33° 


F 
= 
32 


= 


42%q 42\q 41% 42% 

om 4 a oe be 1a%e— 
2% 27% Mat 

1s i ts 14g 142+ 


sx ats! DANIEL F. RICE 
AND COMPANY 


Established 1923 
Members New York Steck Exchange 
and other principal exchanges 
/ 
14 Wall Street, New York $3 / 
COrtiandt 7.3512 Pa 


Olfices in and Private W 
CHICAGO . MIAMI BEACH 
MIAMI . FT. LAUDERDALE 


# 
A 


38% IDAHO POW 1.60 
32 sHilinois Central .. 
70% Ili Central pf ... 
11% Hit Term RR 

26% Indpis, Pw&Ltl 20 


H 


gen gts- Fg 
: 8. “g8": 
5 


Br 
af 
B°3 "32 


| 
Wh 
oa 


stss 
P > 
exese 
F 
+i+ 


Ff 


> 


=ppsananyooeasbah 


SBa535°*2°*3552* 


$s 


= 


° 
§ 
z 


Ss sTocK Bearces 5 
2 


23 
Py 9 


17%, 
43%q 45% 45 
43 144 143 
. 125¥g 125% 125 
17Vp Inspirat Con Copt 16 20% 20% 
45% Interchem Cori60 2 SS Si¥y S3 = S3tg+ 
9%q intercon Rud 35g 10 11% ts 11% 11%e+ 
13% loteriake Iron tag 46 1634 17 t6lq 16%+ 
MVe+ 
19914 1991) 
15% 10 Int Mydro-Elec A 31 14% 14% 1a et 
| 33%— 29Vy Int Minerais&Ch 1 1 328q S2% 
| 95\%q Int thin & Ch pt d= 3 
| 11% Tig tnt Mining . 
42% 35¥y Int Nick Can 1.60 70 
1148 «6136 «Int Nick Can pf7? 70138 138 
P ° 


ee £5 
=~ 
ss 


33 
ee 
>» Soa 

; 


gosebiey-censs 


& 
ee 


: 
2 
- 
= 
& 


i 
$3567. 


823 35 


FFET 


378 


- 


Merritt Lyncu, Pierce, FENNeR & BEANE 


Underwriters and Distributors of Investment Securities 
Brokers in Securities and Commodities 


70 PINE STREET NEW YORK 5, N. Y. 
Uptown Office: 730 riFTH AVENUE 


"9 
ae 
z 
Z 


csusiigustustesectustc 


Fz 
Boat 
> 
a 

: 
Bs 
. vr: 


1044 Pitt Coke&Ch ¥ 
Jive Pitt Con Coal t 
40 Pitt PI Gi 80... 12 
10 Pitt Scr & B 40. 12 
14%) Pitt Stee! .. 10 
Pitt Sti 5% pf.t120 
83 «Pitt Sti prof2agkt 40 
18Vy Pittston Co ..... 9 
2124 Plymouth O1f 1d ; 3 C 1 
Poor & Co 8 Vye, 
23 Pressed St! Car 1 14 sencera 
62 Proc & Gam re : 09 4 
33%) Pub Svc Colo . M 
4 Pub Svc NJ tee.. 13 ty ™% 2 Public 
"ata id" an Fa en a fe LL 
Pub S$ NJ 4 Tethies 
16 = Mamiiletye De Loe Put $ NJb%ot6 T110 123" 123%9 123 1234 Utilities 
Johnson&Jobn 60 ++ | 115% 109 PubSNJ $5 pfS..1160 110%4 11l 110% tl — 
Sv 108% Jonason & J oat 1 109% 109% 109%4— 117Vy 114% Pub S EI&G pf St 10 115¥g L1S¥y 115% 115%)— 
Jones & L Sti 2 S6 4302 44Nq 43% Set ‘4 on S84 Pullman tye .... 8 65 $534 65 65'4+ Common Stock 
a Jones& L Sti pfAS 1106 106 106 106 %4| 2834 19% Pure Oi! | 22 27% 2% 27 7h— 
dones& L Sti pfBS $130 131% 130 isi%t 38% 32% Purity Bak 1.600. 4 36 36% 36 36%4+ 


KAN CIT SO 
Kan City So pf 
Kaufmann 0 
Kayser (J) 200.. 
lg Keisey-HW A 1% 
KelseyH Wh B . 


ve 
‘ 


3 


ge 


$*55e23835 


wae 
sax 
ri 
Sa% 
$5* 
= 


es ts 
tat re 
ditnsdinnnGveelbatte tate 
ssh #32335 
#3°5*5 
’ £F 
See.3t 
+101 kid ¢ 
blah Sebati F 


SB 
233 


SESSESSSSTESSTETE 
== 
38% 


23 


i 
Seas 
= 


oa 


$5555 
55 
ji 
SSs= 
cas-s 
& 
= 

“pop rist 3535 
23s 


~“ 
- 
> 
inal 
ser" 


2¢ 
$55 


+ 


2 
2 
i 





= 
a 


“s 
i 
ttt} 
oxy 


37 sInterstDepSirsi rT) 


2s 18% JACOBS (FL) 209 
lig 46\q Jewel Tea T0e.. 


- 


Niaz 252 


3 
ij 
eal 
3 
i} - 
2 


SerFy5 


spr eetss 
: 

Es 

<32 

utes 


i 


SE 1335 


- 


i any 


$3 
38% 


eee = 
at 
aH 
SS 3=Ss3 
t 


#2 
: 


B°3"3* 
2? 
ae 


ee 
- 
a 
I 
Sts 
— 


rs 
353s 


P3 
Sericy 
tf 


siege 
7 


ass 
b 
i 

a 


g 
S 
. 
2 s 
geey Eeje 


*EEERS 


BES*S 


>>> 

233 
=a 
332 


sgszegesye 
vi 
#72 


3f2e5 
ss" 


TIME, Inc. 


Stock 


ett tty 
Hy 
£3 


yee 
B55 


a m 23%) 19% QUAK STA OIL 1 3 234 243 B= 


185533589 


+t 


Circular on Request 


a at ~& 


Sesghzyery 


% 
=3™ 
sa55 

+i+ 

a 


t “9 
im 1 RADIO CP 20e.. 16% 16% 16% 164%:— 
mt HI 3 pt 3a Miz 91% vi sitet a 


265, 
ant “a ae si tio tot ia 


+1 . 
2m—W| ie 20% 284 wat BENDIX, 
me J 8 + 
% a Fee heat St Mes 4 10 4 LUITWEILER & Co. 
“a Reis(R)&Co j 
‘i “se 27¥y Reliable Sto 1.. =. § * MaEmMeces 
oe ie ~ —~ be Ra 1 4 1 ‘ NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE 


* Ma in vend Avia Va9.. 2 NEW YORK CURS EXCHANGE 
| S7%p 13% Repud Pict --.... 3 ‘ VARIOUS COMMODITY EXCHANGES 
sis 2134 1734 Repub Pict as ! 
iN) = aa ay 1 26% 2 a2 i 82 WALL ST. 730 STH AvE. 
Rev C4&B of ’ NEW YORK, N.Y. 
t'4 Reynolds ei. € 
113% Reyn M pf S¥..t 
- are , 1725 BOARDWALK 
ta sé wH% ss Tob 8 1.40a ATLANTIC CITY, NM. J 
i 1 
he 22\q Rneem Mig. 1 
1% M4 Richfield Me 
2% «=«Ritier Co la..... 


sues 


Sexssise 
ane 


SS BaES 


eezz¥ 
nchze 
ogee 
Be 
Egos 
et; 
Bee 
sx 
e3*3522°32 
zs 


t. 


: 


632 


uisa%eses 


33 
Sphytopeestsyss 
ea 
if 
yi 
ees 
Sz ~nifabdg x53"? 
#553 
sugse 


Set 
oe 
=8 
- 


Bought + Sold + Quoted 


“3 
+ 
i g 
wenn BS—enSSSES55~ SS. SRBC owe 
- 
- 
+ 


823855 


sgeereenayg 


fT 


2 
SSSSSSSSSS SST TT5 
2? 


3 

a) 

2 

ack 
Ser 


eo 
s29¢5 suastrasysyecy 


e 


R 
tt 
Sun ~Sud—o¥ 
Tf 
223 


— 


33 
Baths 


83°3e°*2 
gcc 


Sgsee 
Fits 
See 
i 


it 
a3 
¥ 
3 


* 
i Serene cant 


8 + Ne 


i 
$.S52S2% 
= 


Ese 
2. 
v 
pregsss 
Litt! 
oO we 
sos. 
2 SF 
oe. 
2s? 
sé 
+ 


3 4 = ss : se” “2s we ; eos $ 


WHITE, WELD & Co. 


Members of the New York Stock Exchange 
40 Wall Street, New York 5 


tepsk§ 
i 
9 


= 


4 
&r2 oo 


@33"8353 
¢ 
BGacinSe 


a 
i 


s¥segesesss 2.5 
BssasysSues= 
gge 
rig 
RETze 
TF ete3r 


Hui 


Neg 
g 
= 


td 


EEE 
23 
gz 
. 
33 


$32 ; 
5 *S23552°522 "32 F 


Bg 
at 


Yan 
™ . 


a2 2z5% 
of! Sfgxtg2 


wat %.shaseas 


coke 


1855 iste 

43ty 41 1 
il 1034 

2% Wy 271 

sty Si\%q 52% 

284 28\q 


z 
2 
ffs 
Fr 


+33%,75 


114% Lib, McNAL 
LifeSavers 


Liggett & Myers 
LiggettaMy 8 ta 
Liggett4My pf 7T 
Lily Tulip 1¥... 
Lima Loco Ja . 
Link-Belt 2... 
% Lion Ol} la... 
Liquid Carbonic.. 
Liquid Carb pf} 
Lockheed Airc 
Loew's Inc 1a. 
LoneStarCem Sge. 
Long-B LA 
Lorillard(P) 1 
LowiswAN 3.52 xd 
owenstein 4 = i 
1 


let 
whens Sti _ 


f. 
ee 


B52°8°*33"352"558"""3yz3523 
5°332532" 
ott 


EF 
BISBS.—u8. 
E z 

BS * 
id 3 


& 
> 
4-4 


— 
cet &euUnhve 


=3s 
ext by 
3 
aBszgrsss 


*-§ 
Se eet 
o333**838 


BES5"3 95 
CeSeey *Ee83y EEF ye 
fT 


? 


: 
ae 

z 

$ 

73 
= 
fee= 
28325 

£*3 
Res 


7 

—_ 
~~ 
—— 


= 
23 


w% 3 wry 
113 113) «183 
62% 624 
14% 145% 
Silg % 
5534 
3 2% 


_Biee_ es e's “sse cesess oe” 


r 
2235 
= 
r 
+$+ 
eege5 
ad 


My SAFEWAY STO 1 
113 Safewy Strs pf S.1 
| G3¥q S2¥g St Joseph Lead 2. 
8 sd Savage Arms ¥2. . 
9%, 77 Schenley Disti! 2. 
| #@ . — Paper ..80 

| 373 b ’ 

y i | ate 28 36¥e Seaboard OW 1. 
3% =6Sears Roebuck la. 

‘| at 


ore"es s 
r 
tt) 
ze 
es 
= 
ail 


"9 


Sacawee 
333 
“$*3 
S 


uve 
= 


2: 


: 
F 
gazes 


38 
a 


35° 
222 
2? 
E 

= 
Fe 
$3 


ae" 


& 
tad 
Seeess Cs 5° £E 


SSSeseys esse 
Pt 
iy 
#2 
#e 
* ies 
sss 


2 
a 
5 
>. 
SB 
Sa 
AS 
= 


ete 


iW? 


. rai) 


z 
S-uan-BS—2- 

eS 

3 


‘7 
rs 


—Cenaee WSC e Sw ian 
tor Te 
% 
*- 
+. 


#3 


3833 §E52*"*2 


ee3323 SES23E72 


fae" 
S¥rsa3* 


SB5S*E*S°°“S**5S3 
5 


a 


$33 


Lies or luasuries, you de- 
mand qualily. It is high- 


— 
“ 
= 


=3°3°3335* 
a 


Hgsscse 


$355 
Ss8e32 


2 
§ 
>” 
z 
bt 
:F 
gees 
+1t+i+ 


FFE 
& 


Steel Stocks Looking Up 


Prospects for the Steel Industry are better today than in 

many years. Foreign competition—except in England where 

production costs are high—has been severely curtailed. 

It is estimated that the American market can absorb 

most of the domestic output for some time, while present 
foreign démand for our steel is very high. 

Many new products and processes developed during the 
war add to the brightness of the picture. 
Write for Circular N.T-47 


HORNBLOWER & WEEKS 
40 Wall Street, New York 5, N. Y. 
Since 1888 — Financial Serowe Adapted to Your Requirements 
Members Principal Exchanges 


Offices: New York; Boston; Chicago; Cleveland; Philadelphia; 
Detroit; Portland, Me.; Providence; Baltimore; Bangor 
Westerly, R. L 


ww ewww www LLL LLE_LLLL 


248 
es 
ee 
> 
z 
¢ 
ii 


= 
re 
= 
= 


= 

~ 
—— = — one 
Poke Rutatt we 


Base** 


i 
: 
! 


3 


s5*355"*9"5"* 


= 
= 
— 
— 
= 
a 


Tea £ 


o2t 
= 
2 
= 
re 
l 
wee cea 


My 35 
tose 1053, 1054 1059+ 
32 32M 32% 32 .. 
ey 26% 26% 


$3: 
iff 
: 
$383%3 
333° 
B5%zs 
3 
a 


FE 
i 
#32 


Ac 


3 
2 


= 
= 


f. 


Sy ise 


y 
E 


es 
= 
Py 
2 
Z 
2? 
3 2 Fie 


Se 
cf 
~EEgtE 
yeez pEcoy 


Sy 3 


#7 


Pi 
i 
fi *s 
eis” eee set 
aT 


> 
a 
22- 


> 
-s2o 
2 
Fo 


Se oe, 


tH lt it +++ 
wat F 
S-0a=ee..§ 


3 
7 
2 


#8323 °3S"S 
? 


ee"3°7ES* 


Bsgesisests 


FS 
3 
=? 
{7 


ae 
2s 
Bs 


2, SFE32 


33 
z 
E 


s2 
= 
Fe 
wim 


Sc 
Se 
= 
Sc 
Se 
4 
sz 


Eys 
2 
? 

Bey 


SE 0533 
EE 


+ 
= 
Tt 


~~ 


#3 


MarineMidia . 
De A," Ry @ Eade: 7 


FF. 
+. +1 


esse Besos eises 


FFs 
Ss 


‘3 

rf 
Bae 
¢ 
wre 
¢ 
oF, 


oo . 
es. : 
> *+ « 


Hee 
: 


3 
a 
mm 


Ss ,39=cus 
E 
z 
Ed 


= 
= 
#z 
or" =- 
;3saes 
= 
oe 
P 


z> 
$s 


FY 
SEES, 
Littil++ 


~t 4 * 


sSsigsyuceuyses 


++1+ 
£88 se8 esses 

ag> 

+} 

3 

x 


3 
; 
t 
“ 


By 
a3 
zs 


z 
s 
sie 


, 
i* 


ESTT 
i 
BSATSEu Sureen ul Sswe0 
epFiysracy: 


¢: 
3 
= 
=i 
sg Eeegzeetss 
gedsgce 
3°83 
a$3 
++ 


z 
é 


eff 


Forty-eight Yeare of 
Stoclk Exchange Experience 


ee he SE ee 
2 


33 
#3 


of 
3 


? 
seesstes” #52 


Se2u5aee% 
3 


3B*2geSEesse 


t 
2533335 


& 


gP®esuss*ss_ 5 
g® ssi 
3 
3 
+ 


Sy** 3533 


6338 


=": * 
34 
g3** 25 
++ 
oe 
= 
eS 
+1 


ts 


ik 

MY 2 

492 Members New York Stoc® Brcehange 
= : and Other Important Eachanges 


3 . 
ost 105% we 10534— 111 Broadway New York 
Bs 24%y 23% 23%— | 
on at ah at + Te nee REctor 2-3900 
S124 52% Si%_ $2%4+ —__— — 
S0q Si%y Sy S0%+ 


- 
. 
ee 


Sogeegs [veges 
SFP war kr Br Fae 


‘ 
etl 
ire 
Base gtpeny 


3: =: 


— 
—_ 


Saas 23 * 


syscyss2E 


2 
eeters weess” £ 


£z 
rF 
exe 
i+ | 
. zx ~- 
eureuwns 


oo 
: 

2* 
-— 

++ 


(SSO SSS SS SONS OSES Se oe eee secneeeeeeEaaneneeee — 
<<< _ 


) 
: 
| 


I 
i 
x3 


ey 

Ee 

Bey 

z 

i+! 
Seesp39s33"* 


th hss 
Stet of 1 


— 


guise $858 


5° 8pp972"2, 


ou 
7, 


this | 
eed 
3 
ee se 
bt} 4 ? 


sieed Corp I +10 sor. 3 | gate ate 
43 Melville see "yg! 135% 114 Stand G&E Sbpr pf $132 132 152 132 + 


9) 
40a 1 ad é 149%) 125 Stand G&E S7pr pf S$ 144¥g 145 14402 145 + 
% t4 42 Stand Oil Cal 2... 18 Sty S6% 56  Sola+ 
47) =: S7_s Stand Ott Ind la 4s, 47 a7 +13 
% 59% | 78Y_ 62% Stand OW N J ta 
P+ 4 Met Edis pf inh: 110% shore tome 109)3— ty 2635 2055 Stand O11 Oh tee 


w 106% Stand Oi! On pf 3% 107% 107ty 107% 
12M Miami Copper \we i™ i 17 Ta /ogve We — ro 4. ‘ee 19% 19% 19, 


a? 
17 
12 
: 
20Uy Stewart-Warn tga 1 21%y 21%, 2 21%+ 
7 
5 
oD 


s2 
gets 


we 
astsutt 
SSES3EE< 
SSsSBVoeSuaweauteo 


i 
: 
i+ 


bee 
* - 


#9 
s 


"55 
pegeeeSey 


i 


Markets in 
Middle Western Securities 


LOEW I & CO. 
Investment Securities 


225 E. MASON S&T. MILWAUKEE, 2 


pegtce 
ve 


> 
z 
: p23: 


7% 78, TT) 78 + 
25 25, 25%q 2519+ 


iaj 


fessus. 
Pe $F 
ittTl iti 


see 


— 
- 
- 
= 
= 
— 
— 


xchg Buff 400. 


SScg 
= 


3$¥q  24Uy Stokely-Van Camp hy MY Mly+ 2 

| 23 21 Stokely-Van C pfl 21% 21M 21v%_- 

23% 1835 Stone & Whstr Ig 23 3% 2i\q+ 

34¥_ 2694 Studebaker Co oat 3» 0 W% 0 

nt 16% Sun Chem .15e.. 20% 21% 2ite+ 

Sait sen Owe ve ¢ siete lube 110m Lise” © wh he 

1 117 «Sun OF pf Adtyt i “4 ‘ 

Th Th Sunray Oli 205.. 38 10% 10% 10%y 10ty at are the peacetime 

S4¥q 44¥4 Sunshine Bic le 4 49 49 48 ABN prospects for aviation, 
"7 
, 
? 
5 


6144 FAIRBKS M te 


3 
7a 
+ 


7 
9 Minn- Mo pf ~~ 1 wane ue is i et 
70 Minn & Stk oe) a ee 
1834 MS(PA&SSMA 19% 19% on 19% 
40\%q Minn MogaM 40% WY, — 
29\q Mission Corp Ileg 398 40 a+ 
Mo-Kan-Texas ... 
Kan. Tex 


ae... 


S=ns5 
- eer 
3 


iti +i t+ 
wr ew 


Z 
3 
: 


S55°2333 


5 
SRe Ss 
Sos 
Sseucu> 


55 
Se 
a! 


: 
i 


“33°23 


$23 


i 


teckeusgys 


tet 


{7% Sunshine Ming 40 22 Wy NY 2 + . , ; 
| 35Mq 2 Jett Sapernestor la... % Wy + world’s largest industry ia 
/138 115 Sup Oil Cal 13502 13644 un yr 1944? How stfongly will 
‘ Superi 43% 44%q 4 ; 

ss " Sutherid Pa ane 1 524 $204 stg sre civilian flying require- 
37 Swift & Co 1.608 uu MM gt ments bolster juction, 
31tq Swift Intl 1.60 } 138g 33% 338+ prox 

341 Sylvan El Prod ta ip 3524 36y— 2 vastly reduced since the 


1234 Syming-Gould Yz9 13% 13%— 15%4+ war's end? 


+ 
) 10% TELAUTOG'H 40 11% 11% f11t%4 . ; ' 

2619 Munsingw new ie én ta Tenn Corp 1 4 22) Wet Feresighted ye senew 
satis Murphy § C) tye 4s ‘| 6 $2 Texas ce 2 “sa po pn will be interested in our 
4 Murphy pf 43 " 20 tite tt 112% 1124 $y Texas Gut 13% 13 ‘a 
1624 Murray Corp... 15 1% iy is ist Wal S60 48. Texas G Sul 2a. a $4344 newest pamphlet, RATE 

29%q 22% Tex Pac C & 28% 273% 277% oF CLIMB, concise, 
20% NASH-KELV '%.. 26 215% 21% 21% 16% Tex PL Tr 189 2vg 2149+ wd Game o 
tp Neshcnat Sut let 10 10 44g 44 42 Tex & P Ry 29 Si%q 52 objective survey of the 
i fe) . ‘ 
Ye Nat Acme ; 38%g 38) .. Soup That oa ‘ai Pn aviation industry. 
19% 19% 


133% Thermoid Co .60 15 7 
Nat is Mig Mie to Thevmeld pt ivat Gita 61% Ask for pansphiet T-+4, 
a 1.20. 22 JO\2 1$¥%q 15% we 
9 te 
Container Ib 1 


12 Third Ave Tran.. 
18% 18%) Y . 
O42 63% FY 4 
Cylindr G 80 27 


17 Thompsa(JR) 1 xd 
49 Thompson Pr tee 
10 10 
Dairy Pd 1.40 11 
Dept Stor la 6 


834 Thompson-Star 
Distiliers 3 


if 
“- 
== 
tit 5: 


= 

= 

a 
R-Seew SSE m we 


BEE 3s 
: 
Py 


; 
Sets 
tsa 


2 


+1 


2°se5e33 
+ 


Suauuk 
set 
SE553*F 

eee 


55 


#33* 


— 32-3 


rs, 
a 
+1 F 
Sx 
F 
ans ee 


FE 


3333 
at ree 
rf 


= 
ee 
#s 
~@ 
a 
+ . - 
Sesser s ces re 


w~8wak 
Serss 
cia’ 


P+ 3) 
#F 
as 
+ 
Pst 


The Crowell-Collier Publishing Co. 


Bought—Sold—Quoted 


W. J. Banigan & Co.. 


Established 1904 
Investment Securities 


SO Broadway, New York 4 HAnover 2-8380 


s 
= 


- 
222° 


Fr, PACK fai 18 


sé 

- 

= 
ENsS= 


16% Mullins Mfg ‘gq. 1 


633 
ass 

3 

. 


SSsSu85 
Ti 
#3*3 


e545 
~~“ oe @e 


°955335**5252 


#33%5333535 2% 


= 
- 
= 
~ 
= 
=~ 


$ 
BS 
3 


10% GABRIEL CO .10e 
Sty Gair (R) 30g .. 
Gair (R) pf 1. 

Gameweli Co 1.. 


$333393*<3 285 
STE 
52 $3* 


SSeut 
- 


é 
f 
3 
3 
see ss 


iE 
B25°32 * 


ns 
~ 
ba 


a 
£ 


So 
i=] 
2 
#5 F 


SEEa3e™ 


33 
$33 


é 
>g< 
sot 
ty 
Fre 
2 


= 
rs 
&s 
Pree 
ie 


* 
F3EE*32 


i 
—~ 


1 St St yw 


23 | ? 22% + 55 o 

107¥q 107Vg 107%, 107 " . 

Sn. = SS co 
ee, Harris, UPHAM & 

1902 198% 19%— 1912+ MEM@ERS N.Y. BTOCK ExCHaNen © 


Site Site Sitg Si_— 
ite 113_ 11% 11% ’ 14 Wall Street, New York § 
111%g 111¥y Tih 111t%y STOCKS, BONDS. COMMOOITIES 


18 18vq 18 
6% 60% 60! 86 OFFICES, COAST TO CoasT a 


TS4, 75%_ 7S%y 75% ome 
oe ag: 


50 Thompson-Star pf 
24g 18% Tide WA O 80a 
112 107 Tide Wat pf 334t 
54% 4034 Timken-D Axle 2 

| 66% S36 Timken R Bear 2 
21%q 16¥y Transamerica “" ! 
71 Sity Trans & West Air 
12% 9% Tri-Cont Cor 209 

1114 111 Tri-Cont pf 6...? 
20% + 16Ny Truax-Traer C 1. 
62% 3994 Twent C-Fox 3 
77% 49% Twent C-F pf 1% 

| 106% 102% TwenC-F pr mate 1 104%4 104% 104\4 104te+ 
| 24 14¥y Twin City R Tr. MM u 23% l3%e— 
| 71% SO Twin C pr pf2¥gtS80 71%, 71% 7019 701y— 
| 26% 20% Twin Coach...... 3 2 ye 2 2 — 
| 

| 77% 66% UNDERWOOD 1 76% 76% 76% 76%4 LENDING 

2844+ 239_ 175g Un Asb&Rud .7 21 21 21 21 

| 6 (23 Union B & P 60a IS¥y 3534 3514 35594 

a%y— % 12s 9834 Union Carbide 3.. 120 120 119 11%)- 
11S¥y 110% Union EI Mo pfSt 110% 110% 110%4 110%, 
L15¥y 112% Un E M4Ygrtsygt 10 113ty 113g 1134 113tQ4 
28%, 23¥y Union 01! Bai 1.. 17 Wy W% Wy Th 
1680 140¥_ Union Pacific 6 15634 15644 15644 1564+ is our 

26% 2+ Yp 120% 112% Union Pacific pf4 1114 [14 114 1M — 2 | 

2 49% 4 49 42% 37Vg Union Tank Car 2 3994 39% (3934 39%4 

NY ChiGSt L pfdk [o 122% 12 33g— 1%) 34% wm United Air ‘" 19% 4lq 39% 40 — | 

NYE Omnibus 3. 4 iy iy ihe tte 7% Zip United Aircraft dy 29 294 30% 29% 20+ BUSINESS 

Y Dock... ie sT\e MMe | 1 109% Unit Airc pf S$... 1112 M2 112 112 
Y Dock pf it 1 * 2 H4 430g United ~ Ae “4 My Sie Dy 


1 
1 
30 
Ps) 
1 
Vv Pwh img 1 91% 73 United ' & a9 a 
Lt pti 1 en os amet 2 ne Lt labi tor 
¥ Shibeiidn ye $71 BN att 2 ite t2| 390 30. UnitsCarFnt 1.20 1 39% 39%) 39% LE 
itt-Sparks a = 17%q 11¥_ Un Cig-Wh Sirs : 18%, 15%, small. Business leans are granted # 
2 
| 
“4 
5 
1 


ey 
232 


= 
= 
4 
= 
+ 
F2 
F 


BogesSeeu 
renee 


S555 
S3set2z 
tr 
sta 
i+ +3414 


ss 
= 


FOR A COMPLETE 


CORPORATE AND FINANCIAL SERVICE 


ll ano’ commoner 


wry 
MUNICIPAL AND COMMODITIES 2 144 Certain-teed Prd. 1 
6314 45 Paper la 
| 
| 


— 
= 


cf 
: 


sey 
Ese 
tat 


oe 
= 


Tas ees 
$3522°33 


Serna 


Sse 
2 


z 


SPESTEETESERE 
rete 


our @ 


2 
= 
+ 
erse 
x 
= 
: oa 


3372 
tt 
23 


5: 


PTE ts 


= 
é 
F 


Pt 


Mal&Sti Cas 
Oil Prod We 
Pow & Lt... 


- 
ats ; 
acs 
s 

2 


1s 
Ss 
a 


==acs sn 
z 


=E~ 
¥_*. 


cai 
ae & 
<A 


233 


$S5332* 
Se 


255 
Fiff 
E 


x 


os 
- 
om 
= 
— 


— —— 


He 
ate 
ST Fu: SL: 


SECURITIES IRA HAUPT & Co. 108% ChampP AF otaat 
Members New York Stock 33 Checker Cab . 
e New York Curb Exchange 
New York Cotten Exchange 
New York Produce Exchange 
RAMBO, KEEN, Now Orleans Cotton Exchonge 
CLOSE & KERNER Chisago Board of Trade 
INC 111 Broedwey New York 6 
PHILADELPHIA 2, PA. pre 2.4108 


NEW YORK TELEPHONE TELETYPE B01 Seventh Ave. 15 Fast Bway 
REcToR 2.2620 349 E. 149th Se, 
1615 Pitkin Ave. Jreokiya 


: 
Bg 


SPPzFT 
or 


ze 
vf 
z 
rs 


3 
rf 
L pe 
eae: we 


s= 
= 


ZSSHsEssuss 
#3 


£ 
- 
SSFE-2SSSS"S55322 
c 
3 
R222 
SzRes 
= —s 
?. PU: 


4 
3 


Yala) ies 
238, 


if 
= 
BaSscgTs 
: 
S535 
Se 


+ 
ws seetesesr 


= 
Ss 


> 
e 
Ss 
St 

Pr 


$52253= LNss=s 353" 53 
s 


z 


- 
Pat} 
= 


as 
. 
$F 


2 
= 


“32355 
z= 
PSs 


i 
$ 
23 


ee 
$ 
3 


$*°333 
<& 


oe 
= 
- 
_ 


RBStBUsds 

eeoseeses 

eaeteuca@cutel 

gSSSSESS" FE 
= 


= 
sgetssy 

$s 

= 


SEPS89F 


£55 
2* 
zs 


F 
ex 


as 0S 


x 
“ESESEEEERS 


oOo 
eoo 
ey,” 
22 
_ “Ss 
Fu ¥g~_- 


; 


Sue 
- 
° 


3ESE2*3 


SSuu 
= 
es, 


2 


Established 1812 


ju NATIONAL 
STATE BANK 


‘ 
‘ 
‘ 
' 
‘ 
i¢ 
‘ 
¢ 
i¢ 
810 BROAD STREET | COHEN, SIMONSON 
' 
' 
‘ 
' 
‘ 
‘ 
t 


Reged opt Seta EN NS ST SSees 


INTER H 
CHEMICAL CORP. | 


z 


* Naty Cin Mill Mch 3Se 

Sp Reutasren 1.60 

City Invest 

2 Ciy Stores .00.. 
f= Br 


st 
yb 


F 
ays ey) 


$*S< 
: 
Hf 
£7* 


: 


+ 
“sees 


| 


a 


gts psu 


Figs toe 
g=2=* 


a 
ee 
~ 
—_ 
rer 


Aan 

Rees 
—-—S eww @ 
sSzete 

PSsF 


- 


a 


& West wii 9 285 : 282 2835 24 = Un Cig-W pr pfity 26 for a long enough time and in 
Am Avita id; 10 up 13% ‘ts 13%_— 4 3? amounts sufficient te serve the 


Special analysis will be 
United Corp...... 6 
Am Col 365g se 47g United Corp pf 2k. purpose adequately. 


sent to investors on r¢quest. 


bitty 
58 

e553 
: 

i 


iit 
73 


sanettie o°53°3 "5 Baae 
er gis 


32 
es seers 
#358¢3 
tes 


2esssz 
- £# 
= 


o°2"E* ZEESES*“ E35 


gees 
eth ee 
; 
S“BESSs2 FPEESE“ECFE" “SEE FEr 
=tes séz 
SS 


=< 
2 
-? 
> 
= 


eefeesereee? 
rrsn 
es 
Ef 23 
ot? = rd <= s att 
Suc 
ceysrt 


EEEE*22 


2 3% ome Wi, Wiy+ United Drug a 7 
‘ rm) i011 “ 1114 111 214% 1655 United Elec Coal I te 

447 Pte} wr | 56 be United Eng&Fdy 2 Sty Site Siy We shall be glad te 
1150 4914 +% “a > ‘We He United Fruit 4 2145 145 analyze your needs. 
13\4 ere TireGR Yee 8 1694 17 16% 17 | 30% 2304 Unit Gas Imp.6Se 12 28% 29%y 2894 29%y 


24% 18 Norwich Ph OO. 112222 2 | sate 47% United MAM 1.20a 11 63tq 6325 62\q 62'4— 
7 15%q 994 United Paperdd... 23 1424 14% 14¥y 14244 BUSINESS LOAN DEPARTMENT 


“y| 4% 27 me ) ad 1 ~ car Te a - % nts my. |a 1a | 0S erpium 2 ; Hii) tet BH eet 2 4 The FRANKLIN SQUARE 
G6iyy Ta) 189 11203 Oliv Corp of ini 1173 7S Mie AT | “Cuil a tno | 
elke Y 5 % 4 “4% | In bankruptcy or receivership or being eearqanied unter NATIONAL BANK 


al . 39g 32Mq Otis Elevator . 4 ¥p | Gantroptcy Act or securities assumed by such companies. TUnit 
23y 100, «75 = Owens-1ii Giass 2e LB) Valof trading ten shares; sales in full, Rates of dividends in the! Franklin Square, L. 1, &. Y. 
28 foregoing table are annual disbursements based on last quarterly 


~~ 


iH 
z=, 


; 
: 


- gs eae 


=22 
oon 
-- 


NEWARK (1) & Co. 
Member Federal Reserve System Members New York Stock Exchange 
Member Federal Depustt Insurance Corp. 


2 
“32 
2 


= 
cr 


ee 

g 
am 
. . . 
= 


ISEErSESsess 


ss 
og 


- 
52> 
=35*2 as + 3 


4sy— 


i 
2 
3 
> 


ESeS*s"s5 és 


38° 


120 Broadway, New York } 


Seco en tooo eoooes 


= 
“53323 

2 

| 


—-_ 
Co ee ee es 


523 

ze 
itt, 
*. 


oun *# eu 
—_— 
-~ 
- 


$ 


76 


ge 
Z 


* INSURED LIBERAL 


OIVIDENDS . Sa a 
IPUESTINENT xr—oen | Oregon Portiand Cement Co. 
For individuals and firms. Lega! for Trust # Spokane Portiand Cement Ce. 


Funds. No fluctuation in principal. Your i | I Circulars Available 
account insured up to $5000 by the Fed- 


eral Savings and Loan insurance Corp. if | LERNER & CO. 


ENN ERA: AV'NES & LOAN ASSOC. 
1623 Wolnut Street, Philedeiphic 3, Po. jf | {| 90 POST SPIE ouense, Ceres 6, BASS. 
Assets 36,5 0 0 : 7 


ip 


2 
2 
~ 
— 


Te 
i 


EES3ES 
= 
7 
gs 


te. 


\8 
BG 
am § or semi-annual declaration. Uniess otherwise noted, special or| Serving Nassau County 


7 
Siie+ 4 1 1 2 % 
1” 1 4% 18 Pac Coast +110 extra dividends are not included, xd Ex dividend, ur Ex rights. | 
“s won * ++ |@ Also extra or extras, » Plus stock dividend, 4 Cash or stock Member F.D 1.C. 
S6t 


ee 


: 
eS 
22E°R2 55253552 


3"5~ 


- 
a 
. 
= 
= 
a 
aod 
~~ 
- 
a 
2 
- 
oa 
~~ 


eat 
#3; 


“Yh 
R: 


35°3-2 
e 


45, 


Mig im 1 1 
S| wet ‘ne @ i iis 171 «#17 th 173 Pe 45 e @ Declared or raid so far this year f Payable In stock @ Paid 
ay 2 m Co a 4% 42% 62% 62%, 62% 62%4 Wiiast year, bh Payable in Canadian funds. & Accunwiated divi- ; 
109% 103% Hecht Co si Mai 107 107 107 107 = ., '882U) 142 Pac Tel&Tel iNet 10 147% we “my 147¥g— Vo! dends paid or declared this year. {Delisting pending kasi 


5 
iy 
Sruwee 


“ 
al 
CY 


~ 


‘ 





FINANCIAL THE NEW_ YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, _ 16. 


Wealth 
Demands Care 


Men and women with large holdings 
are finding the specialized services of 
our Personal Trust Department in- 


creasingly helpful as World economy 


BONDS AND SHARES MONEY 
ON LONDON MARKET) zx 2 


me Loans: 1'4 to 1g per cent. 
~~ Commercial Paper: % to & of 1 | 
Uncertainties About Granting Pe sedieeenr Bills: Rates for pur- 


of Loan by the U. S. Act as chase or discount, 42 to %, 30 
: to 90 days; “« to %4, 120 days; 

a Damper on Trading % to %«, 150 to 180 days. 
Rediscount Rate: On advances 
to New York Federal Reserve 


By Wireless to Tue New York Tomes member banks - secured by 
LONDON, ‘April 30—Uncertain- United States Government se- 
| ties about the granting of an curities of all maturities, 1 per 
|American loan were responsible cent. 
\for quieter conditions in stock) London: Demand loans, % to \ 
| markets today. of 1 per cent; short bills, % of 
These loan doubts checked fur- 1 per cent; three-month bills, | 
\ther investment demand for British ‘: of 1 per cent. 
|Government stocks and under the 
‘ead of Old Consols—which lost a 
quarter — prices were lower in| New York: “Foreign” silver, 


Silver 


e sneuthnanedia tiatite Net for Year to 


$34,351,014 EARNED y 


FINANCIAL 


BY RDISON cysTRy | This is under mo circumstances to be construed as an offering of these securities for sale, or as an offer to buy, or as @ 
solicitation of an offer to buy, any of such securities. The offer is made only by means of the Prospectus, 


NEW ISSUE 


March 31 Equdi to $2.04 a * 
Share, Against Prior $2 | 


| 


May 1, 1946 


$32,000,000 


The Consolidated Edison Com- | Utah Power & Light Company 


pany of New York, Inc., and sub-| 
sidiaries, reported yesterday for| 


rt ne nf yes First Mortgage Bonds, 234% Series due 1976 


31 a consolidated net income of! 


| $34,351,911, compared with $33,-! Dated May 1, 1946 


877,911 a year before. Common! 
stock earnings in the respective 
periods were $2.04 and $2 a share. ' 

Operating revenues of the sys-| 


Due May 1, 1976 


becomes more complex. selected issues. For the same rea-| 70% c per ounce; London, 44d. |ton, aggregated $301,683, 062,’ Price 101. 50% and accrued interest 
son tobaccos fell on fears that leaf ———————————== -| 
Those services are not stereotyped. powders may have to be cut egainst, S0c et iet, willle ObgtAts 


I} . ing revenue deductions ayere $245,- 
They are shaped to the individual OD | neattustrials generally wore aniet OFFICERS, R SUMING 120.835, againgt $240,508025. 
‘ : i e ovement was note The report Showed thx. 2 inclug 
needs and wishes of each client. jin aircraft shares. Home rails ae s62,- *  Coptes.of the Prospectus may be obtained from such of the several underwriters 


: if into f ST, GA " 2 5 ' : : 
A friendly talk with one of our Trust i five-eighthe ‘aoe sretlecha. basher WALL aa ote, with Pane % SE ec, Oe en rey cecmriles én this State 
Officers will not place you under any Gold shares opened dull but a ORs rene < ai 19. 


Soath ° P . ii@ jter prices in Capetown brough 2%," BH Maen 3 ‘sales. of electricity for, 
obligation and is quite apt to result in H® \about a good recovery in late ted Lieat. - a ‘Stone » korea the recent period ~ amounted a’ } . . 
a mutually advantageous arrangement. ing. Copper shares were strong, to _°8,110,547,048 kilowatt-hours, | The First Boston Corporation 


Rhokanas gaining a quarter. His Own Company—Quinlan against 8;350,398/727 in the 1945 


Oils in small trading had firm period. Gas*sales were 45,069,506,- : > ty ; , 
appearance. and Wynkoop Return _ [Boo ‘cubic feet. compared with 43 Blyth & Co., Inc: = Eastman, Dillon & Co. Glore, Forgan & Co. 
verage closing quotations fol- —_—_—_—_—_ 947,378,500, and sales of steam! ‘ ‘ - 
low: were 14,098,753,000 pounds, against, Goldman, Sachs & Co. Harriman Ripley & Co. Kidder, Peabody & Co. 


Price} Army officers continue to return 15,871,129,000, lncergerated 
) rie | ime, Te Mts ig| tO Positions they formerly held in) For the first quarter of this. year| Mellon S ities C : Smith. B & 
lane ¥ once en hen tid the securities industry as’ the War|consolidated net income was $15,-| e1ion Securities Corporation mith, Barney Co. 
BAN K Elec Ind i Mexican Eagle . Department speeds demobilization, | 614,178, compared with $12,211,802) 


i | Min, Trust, ta Sit was disclosed yesterday. Lieu-|for the 1945 quarter. Operating] Stone & Webster Securities Corporation | Union Securities Corporation 
Cela Ste | Rhokana "Corp iaavea|tenant colonels and. majors figured $83 401.614. ere $87,292,467, — 
TRUST COMPANY (Carreras Lta'a ites | Seat" "tee ea|im several of «the month-end firm ye ree gunenetaty,. the’ dom) White, Weld & Co. Blair & Co., Inc. Coffin & Burr 


Shell T 
Founded 1824 A \Scns Gola Pe abode | peigad Lab.-108e 7444 | changes. pany had on March 31 a twelve-| =~ 


MAIN OFFICE (Courtaulds .... Sie 34 | Un Steel Lia. 284%4/ Lieut. Col. Louis Stone, who re-|month net income of, $33,307,244, | Harris, Hall & Company F. S. Moseley & Co. 
165 BROADWAY, NEW YORK (15) |De Havilland ton vd Vickers Ltd . 225 4uq| cently one from active duty|compared with $33, 804,395. For the (Incerpor ated) 


A West Witwater 9:6 | in the Eu pean Theatre, an-|quarter net income 4miounted to! ? ° 
BRANCH OFFICES: | ind. based | SEN #832 nounced formation of L. Stone &|$15,230,771, against $11,846,503 a/f/ Paine, Webber, Jackson & Curtis 


No. 320 Broadway 49th St. — Lexington 7 Sppeapyey” BONDS 
23rd St. — 10th Ave. 11 West Ay + Brit 2s, Cons Co., Inc., to deal in bank stocks| year before. 


te7, ee ° Sd . 
29th St. — Sth Ave. 37th Sc = Sth Ave Guinness & Co.18% 64 | Brit 34% WL. floog|and other investment securities. SEL BES HN Shields & Compan Tucker, Anthony &Co. The Wisconsin Compan 
Sith Se = Secetwrey Jick Be = Modions Hudson Bay. ites Breil F's unas caf|Maj. Philip R. Meyer will be in) Promoted by Oil Well Supply ~_— " Y ote 
; nv SO eee ew eee, Ot the tending Gpartment. Gg. F. Gestsinger, Sermenly ao] A.G. Becker& Co. -CentralRepublicCompany Laurence M.Marks&Co 
FOREIGN. EXCHANGE | army Air Forces, ths returned to| stant treasurer, has been elected] saga = ——— 
Army Air Forces, has returned to| treasurer of Oil Well Supply Com-| ~ ; ; 
the Stock Exchange firm of subsidiary of United States| Dean Witter& Co. G.H. Walker & Co. Auchincloss, Parker & Redpath 
Tuesday, April 30, 1946 Minsch, Manell & Co., with which! Stee] Corporation, to succeed A. C. 
- vines neers heey — for twenty years| Wimmer, who has resigned after 
STERL " rior to e war 
CANADA tres) oy vi Hos uae i After four years’ service in the ae Ad so dhnnanaa 
Pn ; C. B. L. theatre Lieut. Col Brooke | 
i ot ins'|L. Wynkoop has returned to Wall|];-—_—————S CC 


| SSaeING-Ser ot $8287 pe ee tem 6 Street to become associated with 


We are pleased to announce that BELGIUM—Basis: 43 francs to the doliar.| Fahnestock & Co. 
rane , 1 “franca ‘8 Maj. Theodore C, Sheaffer today 
4 (O84 


0 ‘|will join the Stock Exchange firm ° P . ° . ‘ 
AUSTRALIA—Par $8.2007 per pound. | of F rants Dulles & Co. ped gen-| This advertisement is not, and is under no circumstances to be construed as, an offering of these 





eatery ot 2 a piprca stead NEW ZRaLAND—Par fh ai frect eral partner. Maj. Gerson D. Lub- securities for sale, or as an offer to buy, or as a solicitation of an offer to buy, any 
, . 2307 lin has joined the Stock Exchange +. . . ° 

Cole SOUTH AFRI Par $8. pet pound. | oh rem tomer & Ga. of such securities. The offering is made only by the Prospectus. 
: | Another war veteran, William E 

is now associated with us. | SWITZERLAND—Parity changed Sept) 28, 1936.) Ryan, has been appointed manager | 


al t det ed. 
a. 0 40 6340 «623.35 jof the Newark office of Francis I. | 


Yer East duPont & Co, 
Pole B55 Sos "5030 "b03r | Gilbert J. Postley & Co. wl 275,000 Shares 


nounced that Samuel Gronick has) 


Latin America } 
Y AnGETInA~Pas 71.8724 cents per Argentina| been admitted as a general partner 
L hnostock Roper pee. “ 248s 2500 Of the firm. R. M. Horner & Co.| Th C ] d F ° 
BRAZIL—Par 408 cebts be * paper cruzeiro disclosed the opening of a Phila-| € O ora 0 ue an ron orporation 
Eslablihed 1884 CHILR Par 30.5000 cents 5 on gold peso, $3 ldelphia office in the Stock Ex-| 
r cums. Ca cents per 7 —_" change building under manage-| 
Montes New Werk Shock Smcdange and other nae rehangas Cables (offcl) 58 58.50 so 658.50 | ment of Edward G. Wyckoff Jr. 
a8 a Ae ory Raymond R. Wilson, formerly of Common Stock 
NEW YORK t Stone & Webster Securities Corpo- 
Demand . ration, has joined the municipal itho 
|PCotes weet Te bond department of the Union Se- (W ut Par Value) 
saso sazs |Curities Corporation, and Lamar) 
VENEZUELA—Par_ 32.57 xr} per bolt iver Tuso, formerly of Vilas & Hickey, | 
NOTE: In the Saoetiens above te the sterling has joined the corporation's rail) 
currencies are in dollars and decimals .of bond department. 


represen and decimals of 
vent op Katz, Zuckerman & Co., ac | 


countants and tax consultants, an-| 
PAPERBOARD OUTPUT OFF nounced that Samuel B. Eigen, for Price $17 Per Share 
s merly of the Bureau of Interna 
We are pleased to announce that 1.6% Decline ne Reported in Week soonaen ban bese panied to the! 
‘Compared With Year Ago The New York and Philadelphia 
SAMUEL B. EIGEN . ee k Stock Exchange firm of Jenks, 
ified Public A tant Paperboard production last week) Kirkland & Co., announced that ie 
Cert ccown, wes Kad sondh od . yr oN Cummins Catherwood had been ad- Copies of the Prospectus may be obtained within any State from such licensed 
e SSOCIA~| mitted to the firm as a limited Satet : 
hes been edeniited te cur fem tion reported yesterday. Now Of|nertner. Orvis Brothers & Co., brokers or dealers as may regularly distribute the Prospectus in such State, 
ders were up 4.1 per cent and UN-| embers of the New York Stock 7 
as a General Partner , filled orders up 1.3 per cent. Exchange, announced the opening 


i yoseee A ape AE gpm a of a branch office in Albany 

= a t of Wiliam 3M HIRSCH & CO 

plied by the National Paperboard| tomas & nH ® 
° Association: 

* Katz, Zuckerman & Company ——Weeks Rnded— 


Framer yi ns ‘2 32= UNDERWRITERS VIE 


50 Bread Street New York 4, N. Y. \Gneitied orders oe m4 ban. 13? bea 311 
TELEPRONDS: Decrease in production last week FOR UTILITY ISSUES 
HA 2-6110 WHitehall 4-3793 was greater than seasonal, and the _ 


adjusted index (a component of 
May 1, 1946 THE NEW YorRK TIMES Weekly In- 
. |dex of Business Activity) declined Continued From Page 37 


ito 154.7 from 165.0 in the preced- oneeman — 
ing week. The figure for the week Auchincloss, Parker & Redpath; 


The Illinois Company; Bosworth, We are pleased fo annou 
ended April 28, 1945, was 157.3. |Cnanute, Loughridge & Co.: Kirk: P nce 


| atrick-Pettis Compan Perrin, RAYMOND R. WILSON the openi f ice i 
MM LOUIS STONE, RECENTLY RETURNED FROM Fournier Joins Pipe Line Concern West & Winslow, ma and Ure, ORAS << ey Someew ae 


ACTIVE SERVICE, ANNOUNCES THE FORMATION OF Specie! to Tus New Yeas Tiss, Pett & Morris. HAS BECOME ASSOCIATED WITH US 


PHILADELPHIA, April 30— 
if AS A MEMBER OF OUR Albany, New York 


i |\Leslie T. Fournier, special assist- sen. eat 
L. STONE & CO., INC. ant to the Securities and Exchange COLORADO FUEL OFFERING 


Commission since November, 1943,'375 999 Shares of Common Are MUNICIPAL BOND DEPARTMENT under the management of 
has resigned to become a_ vice 
WHITEHALL 3-2080 \president of the Panhandle Eastern Being Marketed at $17 WM. MINOT THO P 
Pipe Line Company. He joined the) Hirsch & Co. will offer to the| UNION SECURITIES CORPORATION ; mA 
TO DEAL IN BANK STOCKS AND OTHaR commission in 1935, serving on a public today 275,000 shares of no-| on etneniate wiancaname 
INVESTMENT SECURITIES. part-time basis as public utility | ’ ; 6 


economist. Prior to his employ- par common stock of the Colorado! 


|Fuel & Iron Corporation at $17 a| BOSTON BUFFALO CLEVELAND 130 State Str 
ment by the commission he was an EO pe ——— - 
assistant professor of economics share. The shares do not represent eet 


MR. PHILIP R, MEYER, RECENTLY RETURNED FROM at Princeton University. a new issue, but are being market- May ft, 1946. Telephone, Albany §-230! 


ACTIVE SERVICE, WILL BE AGSOCIATED WITH THE kha ed for the account of stockholders, | 
including Allen & Co., Schoellkopf 


ns ce ie Oe ge WARNS OF DANGERS Niagara Share Cojortion S| $$$ —s| 
eine =e IN 'RASY’ Gl LOANS) ston scenes? tts ona Orvis Brothers & @ 


lof $11,000,000 notes payable to) Announcing the formation of 
banks; 504,907 shares of 5 per cent Gstabliched 1672 


cumulative convertible $20 par Members New York Stock Exthange 
WE ARE PLEASED TO ANNOUNCE THAT Continued From Page 37 value preferred stock; 1,127, Mol W. H. M ORTON & C O. and Other Principal Exchanges 
shares 6f common stock and we) - 


4 ‘munities that it is approaching the! pants to buy 629,828 shares of com- im Maronaran | 
MR. KENNETH M. SMITH lecandalous.” He said the veteran| a7t# to buy 629.828 shares of com 14 WALL STREET, NEW YORK 5, N. Y. 


< ,b rciful- ; 


PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF WHOLESALE Urges Housing Leadership OTHER pomenennes HAnover 1-5630 
SALES AND SYNDICATE DEPARTMENTS. | He asserted that the loan provi- Capitol Mesents 


‘sions of the GI Bill of Rights were 
.| The Lee Higginson Corporation 

jnot tied up with Government re 
E. F. GILLESPIE & Co. | strictions a that, therefore, mort- is underwriting manager for the 
: ‘gage, bankers could not continue|°Urrent offering of 95,000 shares STATE AND MUNICIPAL BONDS We take pleasure in announcing that 





May 1, 1946 











WE WISH TO ANNOUNCE THAT 





20 BROAD STREET, NEW YORK &, N.Y. 





Underwriters — Distributors 


of Capitol Records, Inc., 25 cents 


{their former protests against con- 
67 WALL STREET eT He weored his colleagues also|P&® value common stock at $19.50 


NEW YORK 5, N.Y. failure to take the initiative in|* *hare. In Monday's report of | . 
eetleienia a aitiaee Minn slenrance well-written build-|%¢ offering, the name of the un-|]! UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT SECURITIES GERSON D. LUBLIN 


derwriting manager was inadvert- 
ling codes, design and construction) sity omitted. | Majer, A. U.&. 


of homes, and declared: “We have Cutis Comnpahtin nino: tent 

ot been the leaders in housing.” ’ : , : 

|" George L. Bliss, president of the| A banking group composed of — is now associated with this firm. 
Railroad Federal Savings Associa-|Cruttenden & Co. Knapp & Co. . - — 

tion, predicted that 3,000,000 GIjand the First Trust Company of 

home loans will be written before|Lincoln, Neb., will offer today 46,- 


Government loan guaranty provi-|050 shares of Curtis Companies, ; STERN, LAUER & Co. 


sions re. He recommended that/Inc., stock at $12.25 a share. The H 
< —_ bankers accept 4 per|company is a manufacturer of WE TAKE PLEASURE IN ANNOUNCING THAT M. Mew York Stoak E 


cent in acest with grace, rather|™illwork and wood trim. , ; 

than “run the risk that by their Greer Hydraulics ELDRIDGE E. QUINLAN 30 Pine Street - New York 5, N. Y. 

apathy, sufficient pressure might) aownsend, Graff & Co. under- LIEUTENANT-COLONEL, AIR CORPS 

be brought upon Congress to result) Writers, will offer today 88,000 

in the enactment of a provision for| shares of 50 cents par value com- 

direct Government loans.” mon stock of Greer Hydraulics, 
Frank X. Pavesich, director Of|tne a wart:me-founded manufac- 

ar ae yw —— ee & Bory turer of equipment for testing and 
be . repairing aircraft. The stock is 

John Thomas Taylor, director of po: ~ | $3.375 a share. MINSCH, MONELL & Co. 

the national legislative committee MEMBERS NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE 

of the American Legion, both; Join “the Marine ‘Corps f for ad- 118 BROADWAY NEW YORK 6, N. Y. 

scored inflated appraisals of hous-|venture, travel, career. All single 

ing and reminded the mortgage|men 17-26 apply now. 383 Madi- MAY 1, 1948 TUTTI 

bankers of their responsibility, son Ave. 


We are pleased to announce that 


_ THOMAS P. CONLIN 


is now Associated with our Firm 


BOND, McENANY & CO. 


Members 


HAS RESUMED HIS ASSOCIATION WITH US. 


New York Stock Exchange « New York Cotton Exchange VALUATIONS 


and Other Important Exchanges 
60 Beaver St., New York 4, N. Y. 


May 1, 1946 


——_ TT 





BOND SALES 
RAILROAD STATEMENTS 


i = 


March gross 

Net oper. loss 
Net loss 
3 mos. gross seee 
Net oper. income 

Net income 

*Income 

Wage increases tn first 
$463,000, all included in 


MISSOURI PACIFIC 


$14 ? STL $19.358.4 
1410 2 802 


1946. 


\Cities Securities Company bought 

|$600,000 water revenue 1% per 

‘cent bonds of Frankfort, Ind., at 
@ bid of 103.014. 

Minnesota 

Minnesota announced yesterday } 


FINANCIAL THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 


OlL COMPANY'S NET May Stores Sales Increase $20,722,480; SANITATION BONDS 
UNITED STATES RISRS SLIGHTLY Net Is $7,680,039 in Record $202,449, 639 SOLD AT 2 a COST 


GOVERNM ENT AIMEE SS | Sales of $202,449,639 for the fiscal cal 


Standard of California Shows year ended Jan. 1 were reported! “Shncom 
SECURITIES 


merchandise continued in many | 
‘departments and said he expected ae Roads Issue Goes to it would receive bius on $7,425 000) as 
Profit of 1 Cent a Share Pavey: by the May Department} geo praette reflect > sed wa retroactive 
on Stores Company. The volume was 
Above 1945 Quarter 


| 
demand to exceed supply for many) Clore, Forga Mellon Group | lof rural credit deficiency fund cer- — m_,- Rt a 
ithe highest in the company’s his-| 


months. tificates dated July 1, 1946, and due. was paid in first quarter of last year 
“During the year the long-term of Banking Concerns ‘on each Jan. 1 and July 15 from) —— 

|tory and an increase of $20,722,480 debt was reduced $4,420,u00, so 

over the previous year. that at the present time the total 


1948 to 1953. Bidders are to desig- Net oper income 
nate interest. 

Consolidated net ‘profit of $7,680,-\long-term indebtedness of the Underwriters headed by Glore, Prescott, Ariz. _CMICAGO, INDIANAPOLIS & LOUISVILLE 
039, equal to $2.94 a share on the| company and its subsidiaries is Forgan & Co. and Mellon Securi-| rch gross cecae «$864.10 © $1,164,449 
lcommon stock, compared with|$13,146,000,” Mr. May said. ‘ties Corporation yesterday were) ©" June 5, Prescott, Ariz., will] Net oper owe. ssseeee gs RST sg aabae 
$5,561,836, or $2.26 a share, in the) He added that a new store would awarded an issue of $6,500,000 of, offer $569,000 of réfunding bonds er” os oper. loss 129.781 * 703.891 
iprevious year. The provision for|be opened in Los Angeles this year revenue bonds of Hampton Roads due on each Jan. 15 from 1947 to ENTERRATIONAL-GOEAT. NORTHERN 
Federal income taxes amounted to|and that the St. Louis warehouse Sanitation District Commission, 1971. Interest may not exceed 3 starch “March $2.024.146 

$19,855,391, compared with $18,-\is being enlarged to serve the! Va., with a bid designating an in. |Per cent. 1S mee omer weetict ate 

967,279. present St. Louis store and three terest cost of 2.2 per cent. The Portfolio Sale ‘Net oper. neanenihin sashes 

“The inventory on Jan. 31 was|more planned in that area. A issue consists of $4,000,000 of se- On May 7, the Ohio State Insur- MINNEAPOLIS & ST. 
is| ($22,105,833, compared with $20,-|warehouse is being built in Los rial revenue bonds maturing from|,.c¢ iund ‘will sell thirty-eight, yg Mt # 
2, 820,269," Morton J. May, president,|Angeles and stores in Baltimore 1949 to 1974, > $2,500,000 of lots of registered New York State |*t 

said in a letter to stockholders.jand Akron, Ohio, are to be en- term revenue ds maturing on) Nero 9 
He observed that shortages of|larged. Sept 1, 1974. The bonds are being 
=a |reotfered = prices to yield from 1 


STOCKS INCH AHEAD 2; . |STO: 
IN QUIET TRADIN 


deemed Feb. 25, 1946. Continesé Page $7 Lobdell & Co. Mackey, lala & Vicks 


Dunn 
|Huyler'e—Twelve months to March| Goodrich, all with gains in excess Co., Inc.; Mackubin, Legg & Cor ry Aven 
31; Net income, $215,050, equal|of ® point. Most motors lagged.|Magnus & Co. Stein Bros, & Allied St pf... 
to 43 cents each on 214,420 com-|#lthough Chrysler and General| Royce, Tripp & Co., Inc.; Walter, *m#! Lestaer pf. 6 
mon shares, against $254,208, or| Motors were lifted 4 point. Other woody & Heimerdinger, and J. G. ‘an ao od ry 
63 cents each on 211, 170 shares arene issues included American| white & Co., Inc. = We 


for the 12 months to March 21, ——— Lines, Remington Rand, 
1945. Cuneo Press and Decca Records. | Washington Suburban District 


The industrials in THE NEW! Washington Suburban Sanitary © uropean 
March of $4,244,933, equal to 86| March quarter: Net oretht $848 $569,- a a ee District awarded $2,000,000 of {@ ji.“ oot red 
cents a share. Net profit for the| 847, or $5.29 a common share, 0.27 to 49. is me th . ombined water main and sewer bonds due|4 Am Inv iit pt... 82 
similar period a year ago was $9,-| against $224,953, or $1.51 a! o r ec rt |from 1947 to 1986 to a banking Am Locomot pf 
145,293, or $1.86 a share, including} share, jast year. wie at 141 ven |group headed by Union Securities im Beats A, oe. oe 


—EE oe 
61 cents of non-recurring profit/Lion Oil Refining Company — |Corporation. The winning bid was Am Snuff pf... 


from the sale of stock in another| March quarter: Net income, FEDERAL OBLIC OBLIGATIONS | 100.666 for 1.60s. stove 


waeey. b Pee rter| $207,783, or 71 cents a share, wenaauay wares ys ers Authorities 
e companys first quarter; against $293,191, or 67 cents a Fou k 
sales of motor fuel were 25 per! share, last year. (Subject to Federal Taxes) benaht $17, set Pee yesterday |dzeeve Cooper” re 
cent ee ae ey > Pas Master Electric Company—March| Rate. ast. viel. |temporary loan not.s of fifteen|smoriates Inv... 33 
sponding period an per) quarter: Net profit, $31,195, or|4,900 July, '46.0.90 "0.86 0.82 0.82 housing authorities at bids ranging |4 tr tone 
cent higher than in the last pre-| 12 cents a share, com with |3,261 Dec., "46. .1% 100.11 100. from 0.72 per cent to 0.69 per cent. | 
war first quarter of 1941, $122,913, or 49 cents a share,|1.968 Mar., '47..1%4 100.8 100. 2! Awards were as follows: emicai Best. 
Frank Phillips, chairman, and) jag year. pe Sept., "47. .1% 100.22 100. Bank & t Co., $14,586,000 at eer’ eh 
K. 8. Adams, president, informed) ,, "47.1% 100.11 100. 072 ver — “~ e| ack 
stockholders that the first ex- — Producers Corporation— "48. .1% 101.1 101. le ad Besse of sin tes wi hick Decket 
ploratory well drilled by the com- or 1945: Net income, $965,165 . Company, Jersey y, Blumenthal ot . 
pany’s "ia eaten subsidiary on| °° 60 cents a share, against 1944 Certificates, of of Indebtedness at 0.70 per cent; Salomon Bros. & | Bene & Ma 
its 25,800 aci’ net of $993,650, or 62 cents a| (Subject to Federal Taxes) |Hutzler, $957,000 at 0.72 per cent) Bower Rol 
0 Sep chien. $y ly var Rt d 0.70 per cent; Hartford Na-|p: 
Monagas has discovered thick oil- share, the year before. 4,709 June, "46.. % 0 0,76 0.76 an pe Brown Shoe 
bearing sands with indications of| Philadelphia Dairy Products Com- 2.49 Aug., ‘46 . 0.82 0.82\tional Bank, $500,000 at 0.69 per |p : 
bd 4,324 Sept, 46... cent. The largest issues, awarded, Beg Reals sd 
prolific production. Additional y, Inc. and Subsidiaries— : \Sech Term pe 
h 3,439 Oct., '46.. 7 e Chemical Bank group, were | pie. yh), 
wells are being started on this re quarter: Net loss, $33,-| 3'775 Nov., ‘46 SHattford. ‘Con $4,457,000: and Buen Bide pt 
block and exploration is progres-| 405, contrasted with net income |>: 176 a “8. Pittaburn h. P — $4,957,000, ~ 
sing on the remainder of the 869,-| Of $93,726 last year. 3, 323 Jan. ‘47. 7 8 
608 acres in Eastern Venezuela. (Plymouth Oi y — March|4'953 Feb., ‘47.. Frankfort, ind. 
~ a + quarter: Net profit, $342,936, or H 131 Mar., '47.. _Haleey Stuart & Co. 
PITTSBURGH | PLATE GLASS 33 cents a share, against $499,- 2/819 Apr., a 
| Net Income for First Quarter Is 
Close to 1945 Figure 


MAINE CENTRAL 


$2 025 #0 
26 oe 
116.145 


BOSTON & MAINE 
1946 1945 
$7,991,549 
“1,013,223 
“817.381 
21,.304.284 
1.598,04) 
*680 061 


727.435 
19.716.911 

410 368 

26. 


. gross 
| Net oper. income 


wuarter of 1944 cost 
arch statement 


March gross 

Net oper income 
5 mos. gross 42 os A 06084 819. 80T 
Net oper. income 4.672.506 8.783.363 


NEW YORK, NEW HAVEN & HARTFORD 


March gross $12.4 $16,168 578 
Net oper. loss 1.430.840 *2.068.486 
Net loss 2.416.955 *1.467.7% 
3 moe gross 36.443.201 43.595.1146 
Net «per. loss 127.280 «=—*4.111. 988 
Net ices 1.903.263 *3.483.397 

*Income 

March figures include $3245.000 for wage 
+4 increases. includ®ng payroll taxes 


WISCONSIN CENTRAL 


March gross $1 904 674 
Net op loss Tee 739 
5 mos gross 5 408 690 
Net op loss 22.575 
*Ineome 
f. expenses for March, 1946. Include $444,< 
195, representing major wage award 


- $25,253,719 $26,382,817 
2,603,897 
73,632.220 
6.016 489 


——-+-——— 


The Standard Oil Company of 
California reported yesterday for) 
ithe first quarter of this year an) 
lestimated net income of $14,530,-) 
'519, equal to $1.12 a share. This) 
jcompared with a net of $14,477,- 
|052, or $1.11 a share, earned in the 
\corresponding three months of| 
| 1945. 

Gross operating income for th 
jyear’s period was $77,116,28 
compared with $81,616,009 last |** 
year. Figures for 1945 were re- 
stated because of termination of 


CORPORATION 
|the war and included accelerated 


Established 1920 amortization of war facilities. 
120 Broapway, New Yorx 5 |]| The company announced a 50- 
jcent dividend payable on June 15 
"Phone: BArclay 7-5660 jto stockholders of record of) 
Teletype: NY 1-584 


Inquiries invited from 
Banks, Institutional 
and other Investors 


Lous 
s. vee} 


‘4 te 
"412 


New York HANSEATIC 


STOCK EXCHANGE BID AND ASKED QUOTATIONS 


Bid fat, 
Readin 


nity Hei? 
Real Silk x. pf. lld% oe 
Rem Rand pf 164 

Reo Motors na 

Rep Steel pf A..115% ui? 


Seab AL RR pf 
Seagrave Corp 
Serv: { ims 1 
Shar Doh pt. 7 % 
Shell Union Ce. wy 3 


Simonds S & St 
PR at in 189 
Sou Ry Mt 


So 

Spalding & Bree Ta > 

Spear & Co pf wm, 
| Spteer Mf. mas 

Squibb} & Sons pf.1is 

Stand Brands pf 11! 

Starrett (LS) “6 

Sterling Drug 

Stert a pf 

Sun Chem pf 

Sweets Co Am 

Syiv El Prod pf 

Talcott (J) Inc 





March quarter: Net profit, 
426,109, or 99 cents each on 
427,824 common shares, against 
$343,294, or 83 cents each on 
360,250 shares, last year. Com- 
mon share earnings are after 
dividend a on pre- 
stoc 


to he Red 
Associated in the offering are: 
Scott, Horner , Inc.;| Closing quotations for issues not traded 
Equitable Securities Corporation,| in on the Stock Exchange yesterday: 
heres & Co., Harris, Hall & sTocKs 
; F. Ww. Craigie & Co., Dol-| B 
nd 7 Co., Gruntal & Co., Roose- | Abbott Lab pf .. 


Bid Asked 
Mead Corp pf 107 ~=100% 
Midland Sti Prod. 55 55 
Minn-Honey pf C 112 
| Minn-Honey pf D112 


Bid. Asked Asked 
Gen Baking 196 0200 
Gen Cigar | 
Gen Time y pt.i06 108 
|Gen T & R pf 100% 110 


| Mohawk Carpet “oy «a 
ew , 4 L-} teat ims | Monsanto C pf Ali2. 112% 


57 | Monsanto C pf P 114% ‘s 
139, | Moore-M Lin pi 54 
t.103'5 toe Morrell & Co- 

31% 38 


| Mullins Mfg pf 
WT) a eres 113 1 Murray Corp pf 
= 


| Myers (FE) & Br. 0% 
Nat Battery 

Nat Biscuit pf 

Nat Bond & Shr 


Nat Gypeum g 
Nat Lead pf 
| Netaner Bros pf 
| Newberry (J J) 
| Newberry pf 
NJ Pw & Lt of 
N Y & Hariem 
Nort & West pf 
| Northern Central 
29% Onlo Edis pf 
Omnibus Corp pf 
Otis Elevator pt 
Outboard M&M 
Outlet Co 
Pac Coast 1 pt 
Pac Mills 
Pac T & T pf 
Pac West Ot 
Paraffine Cos 
Paraffine Cos pf 
Penick & Ford 
Penn Coal & C 
Penn Gi Sand pf 
Penn Sait 
Peoples Drug 
Peoria & East 
Pere Marq pf 
Pet Mik 
Pet Milk 24 pf 
Petrol Corp 
Phillips- Jones 
Phillips-Jones pf 
Pills Millis pf 


May 15. 


LISTS $4,244 933 PROFIT 


Phillips Petroleum Quarterly Net! 
Equals 86 Cents a Share 


Marking its highest first-quar-| 
ter profits in the last eight years, 
with the exception of 1945, the 
Phillips Petroleum Company re- 
ported yesterday a net profit for 
the three months ended with|International Silver 


me i 


a 


great { 
BJ 


133 119 
ior” 1 


115% 120 
109%, 113% 
ia 
136 
1 33 
os «6110 
™ 82 
‘su 47 | 
178 «179 | United Maal pf 108% 4 
ae 53% U S&S & For & pf ies 
U S Freight ™% 3 
24 U & Play Ca ™ 8% 
a U S$ Tobacco pf © SI% 
13 
oN 


 » 
Whe bf 240 


PEs 
= 


mg 
Millions. | 
United Stores pfiis 


Univ Cyclops Stl 2& 
| Van Raalte ss. 6 CS 
| Vieks Sh & Pace 112941 
Vicks Sh&Pac pti 
Va tren Cac “ 
Virginian Ry os 
| Vulcan Detin 163 
Vulcan Detin pf.178 190 
Wash Gas Lt y n% 
| Weeon O 4 Sore 
| WatPennk! 7% pf 119% 120 
| W Va PaPap pt — 


I NGINEFF 4 


et 


AN 


CONSTRUCTORS 
} ‘Mowell pt. 


-Sani 


oe 


104 
“™% 
175 


Ry: 
Weg: 
sts 
ro 


7 


12 0.89 
9 0. 

23 0.97 
12 0.96 
2 1.03) 


ili 


Ees23 
Paes 
R 


Te 
j 
“f a 


= 
a 


z 


; 
é 


SFE" 3°33"? 
Ez 
t 
2 
sis gas 


a 
se 


a 


Vigoss sacisce, 


Forgings 
rt Wayne 


3 S38 b ed 8835 &¥ 


fi 
: 
3 
; 


BRANIFF 
AIRWAYS 


BRANIFY AIR- 


fF 
cE 


jaley 
2% 
St 


WheelaL Erie pf seats 1 
White Sew M pf 
| WhiteSewM pr “sy 

st Wilson & Co ‘By 
Wise EB) Pow pf. 180 
WorPaM cv prpt.100% 102 
Wrighey (W) Jr... TTS + ja 
Yale & Towne 83 


i227 


F35°*3 


~— 
-— 
~ 


Bg283 


Plough 

Po Creek Poe 

| Press Sti C pf 

Pure OF 5% pf 

RR See TliCenStk mt 
Reading 1 pf oo, 1% 


rectors of 


tee 


Carpenter Stl 
Carrier Corp pt : 6M 
Otts Elevator pf 176 


| iax9F* 


112 117 
1064, 100 


Mcintyre 
McKess & om pt...104 


ecccoecooce: 
SSSSSSSSES 
eooccococe: 
SSSSRSSRi 


LJ and| . 


essosssos 


BOND TRADING ‘ON NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE 


352, or 48 cents a share, last —a 
year, TREASURY BILLS 
Reiter-Foster Oil Corperation— (Subject to Federal Taxes) 
For 1945: Net profit, $8,764, For discount at purchase: 
contrasted with net loss of $4, 179) i ar Sane Be seereeee . sone | 
the year before. ioe > May ** 0.375% 0.33% 
Scott Paper Company — mareh| i1'30! May . 0.375% 0.33% 
quarter: Consolidated net earn-| 1,316 May 0.375% 0.34% 
ings, $410,564, equal to 51 cents/1,308 June . 0. 375% 0 34% is ; 
each on 804,782 common shares,|1,303 June "0.375% 0.84% S108 4-46. 
against $315,493, or 47 cents/1,315 June 
each on 667,942 shares last year. i2. 313 June 
Silver King Coalition eines Come ie 7 uy 
pany—March quarter: Ne aus 48 
$40,287, against $67,410 loss, Inst (2/320 July 35... ose Oaeele F $0-48 Dec 
year. Twelve months to March 
of common stock or 180 31: Net loss, $6,551, ,compared INSULAR BONDS 
bination! The first quarter earnings re- with one of $54,600 for preceding Rate ie 


dor Clase “B ‘stock of twelve months. 
each share of flect two factors, Mr. Higgins ex- ppl 
re {| plained. The glass strike prevented Studebaker Corporation and Sub- (is: 
scale production until the sidiaries — March quarter: Net| Pn 


any time during the ¢flistter part of January, which had| loss, $129,760, after $4,356,000 
sartng Stier say aoa by an adverse effect on earnings, ‘tax credit resulting from tax 
‘ening the necessary form ts| “However,” Mr. Higgins continued,| carry-back, contrasted with net 
And pursuant to the instructions| “the inclusion of certain items of| Profit of $1,024,323, last year. 

cof Mokan Stork to be exchanged [non-recurring income and the de- Symington - Gould Corporation — 
RATION TRUST COMPANY. 15| line in necessary provisions for, March quarter: Net loss, $497,- 
La ad Federal inconie taxes aided in| 490, contrasted with net profit 

et ane Technicolor, ie and Bubaiiares Abr. 
PFIZER NET Is 5 $2, 857,788 —For 1945: Net profit, $667,441, 


ual to 74 cents a share, against |* 
will sutoe aute- Quarter's Earnings Compare With 9,156, or 95 cents a share, the 4 
$553,352 a | 7 Year Ago 


year before; net sales, $11,614,- [3 
780, against $11,194,380. (abr 
Chas. Pfizer & Co., “Bae. manufac- Thrifty Drug Stores Company, Ine, 4 
te notice te be coe |turing chemists, announced yester-| —Six months to Feb. 28: Net hor 3 
“fo buy, any shares|day in their first quarterly atate-| profit, $541,222, equal to $1.64 Apr. 
eck, the he ment for 1946 @ net income of} & common share, compared with|25) 
ef| $2,857,788, equal to $1.04 each on| $248,999, or 74 cents a share, for |Apr- 
ob | 1, 470,000 common shares outstand-| the six months ended with Feb-|4;,: 
ing. This compares with $553,352, 


ruary, 1945; sales, $15,946,690, rs 
or 38 cents a share, for the quarter) 4gainst $13,633,396. During the ap 
ended on March 31, 1945, giving 


latest period, the company re-|Abr. 
effect to the company’s stock split-| classified its former 6 per cent|Apr 
—=—=|up of two additional shares of each 


———— cumulative preferred stock of| 

. share outstanding in May of 1945.| $25 par value into 44% per cent ‘ 

Republic of Panama The conunannta "panes ite the, cumulative preferred shares of ise seed 

March quarter of Jast year showed; $100 par value, on the basis of), ''':: 
earnings equal to $1.10 each on the 


presse Gartifientes three-tenths of one such pre- 1941. 
. ferred share for each share of|} im 
at i ee $ ip, the Service srentioust 500,000 shares then outstanding. 


Transter books will not 
Cc. G. ADAMS 
Treasurer 


U. S. GOVERNMENT BONDS | 


Stock Exch. Desiers. | 
sP 4PM 
Bid. Asked 


100.8 100.10 
100.8 100.10 
1054 105.6 
101.30 102 
101.26 101.28 
103.18 103.20 
101.14 101.16) 
on | 
102.31 
192.25) 
102-29 CAN NAT Ss 69 Oct... 
. 31 | Can Nat Ry 4445 55... 
107-24\ Can Nat Ry 4¥gs SI... 
105.20 Can Nat Ry ats Se... 
ae can Pac 4 yt menue 
ay Carthage & Adir 4s 81. 
106.19 | Celanese is 65 
101.19} Con of Ga Stas 59... 
$| Cen of Ga Ss 99 C.. 


NY Pow 3s 74... 
Pac Ss 60 
Pac 4\qs 74 .. 


TRANSACTIONS, MONDAY, 


U. S. Gov't Other Dom. Bonds. 
v prope $4,230,000 


3,870 000 
499,155,100 
944,035 900 


Harry B. Higgins, president of 
the Pittsburgh Pilate Glass Com- 
pany, in his report to stockholders 
to be released today shows a net 

Se OFFER income for the first three months 

BY GIVEN to all holders st of 1946 of $3,330,825 after all 

Caetpeny \Mekan) thet tne|charges and taxes, equal to 37 

Offer under the|cents a share. Income for the 

Seo $5"tee | March quarter of 1945 was $3,416,-| 

treat ered/ 894, or 39 cents a share, based on 

. el ii ie stock of shares of $10 par value, Net sales 
5-5 ws of Panhandle Eastern Pipti¢or the first quarter of this year 
mock owned Mckan at the rate oft 4 shares|were $37,177,804, against $38,743,- 


"a0" shares “st /806 @ year ago. 


Dellas, Teras 
Sales in 
| $1,000 High. Low. 


PCC & SL 4s 57 G Sa ta Ca oe 
Pitt Con Coal Js 65. 2 1038, 103%, 101% ., 
Pitts & WVa 4tgs SBA 4 100%) 100%) 100%). 
Pitt & WVa 4195 OC. 3 100% 100% 100% 

Prow Sec 4s 57 Se @© @ — 
Pub Svc EG&G Itgs 1 111%, 11H ilite+ 


4107 197 «(tor 
53a 8 8 + 


2 95% 95% 95% ~— 
“+12 63% 


APRIL 30, 1946 


Foreign Bonds. 
$230 000 


210,000 


Net 
Tot. All Bonds nat. Chee, 
$11,960,000 
5,120,000 
31,757,700 $45,615,100 


4 616 200 986 950 850 


MISSOURI- “maneag a7 FIFE L Line E COMPANY 


Day's sales 
Treasury. 


Monday 


Year to date . 


RIO GR W IST 4s39°t9 
Ri Ark & La 4¥gsierts 


ST L & ADIR Ss % 
MLSFR SOB 
"1192 4% 


St. S F 4s 78.. 
Yo a *t 6 Oy 99 


HLS F 4s 
Sp SUPAKC Shu 4¥qesi*tS 10 99 
14% 


Een # one 

Sea Al | w 

. ~ 000 S tent 190k, 100% 
. 9105S 106105 + 


0.375% 0.35% 24s 51-48 
= les Net Sales in 

0.375% 0.35% | tas _ $1,000 High. Low. Lest. Chee. $1,000 High. Low. 

. 51? 1) OY + 1% ICACSLANO iipe 63.: 5 9% ti w 
7 H% @% 4 

one i 

799+ 


82.*7 
1118 15 115 — %{ Int Gt Nor Int 6s S30 15 8% 
4 123% 123% 123%— _Sal ln Gt er Se 59 8.07 ms 
a+ 
4 121% 121% 121%9 T 4¥qs $2. ... . 2 101% 10195 1013,— 
5 116¥y 116% 11614— 1% int tat ss 10 105% 105% 
1s 8 & 
re KFT SAM te 36.18 1 82% 
K C South 4s 75 M8 10399 103 
7) 107V4 | 


__ Last. onge 
% 


Bush Term 4s 2.. 


is 


ee scée 6s sete® te & 


Poe : ot 
Sea Al _ - 
| Socony 
Ya | So te tar" 
| Sou Pac 4¥ys 
Ya \Sow Pac 4¥qs 81 
Ye\So Pac 4tys 6....... 
\So Pac 4\os 
South Ry 6 a 
Ye | South Ry gen 6s 36... 
South Ry gen 4s 56... 
So Ry 46 Stl SI . 06% 
- |S W Bell Tet 28s 8S. 2 106%, 1041y 1oeva— 
S W Pub Svc 74. $105 105 165 
“Ye! Spon Int 4¥ys 2013 AS 1 S84 58% SB 
Stand O11 N J Js 61.. RY... 101% 101% 
— & Co 2s 61... WIG IM I 


|T RRA ST L 45 B19. 3134p Lig LQ 
$s pos 10644 106\q— 


diets L4sts date Int El és 44... 18 89 
4 JON & LAU ST Sigs 61 8 103% 103% 103%— 
4 1956 12% .. 


‘BOND AVERAGES 


APRIL, 1946 
Domestic Bonds 


Jan., 


82 
103te+ 


~ 
~ 


| LAUTARO wir ine 


$ 


z 


jee 
— 


* 
ggS555535 


i 
=° 


Indus- Util- Com- 
trials. ities. bined 
102.30 100.17 103.46 
0 100.05 103.47 
ed 103. 43 


= 


g2eee 
aye 
g 


Ralls. 
Le] 
. 106.90 { 


835 
= 
rs 
= 
= 
rit 
Sf 


: 
= 


23*585°3*3 3 3 


@s<ss555 
he ee ee we 


Z 


1.99 100 
Ie 


330 100. 


> 


& stockholder of Mokan and 
any —_ whatsoe 
(b) anal 

ham grok nolders 


oa 

..T 102.3 102.4 
102.3 102.16 
116.28... 


= 
- 


=augs 
BSSse 
es 


§ 835525*582°3* 


= 


ues 
ee 
Ez 
§5= 


3 


S 
= — os 


sid tad 


1S 17% 78 

. 2 tone 9% 100 + 
10 103\q 10314 103% 
39 O04, 1062_ 106% — 


2 By Hy Hy 
110? 1? ia 
8 8h STN «TG 
4107 106% 106% 
21 102%4 10144 1024 
28 102%4 101% 1027144 
19 103%_ 103%y 103144 


Fs 


sues? szss3s2 


28284 SER52 
E 


< 


Third Av 45 @ 


eld 


Z 


Pete Pe) 
£5 SS. 


fle 


UN PAC tet 4: 47 
Un Pac 2% 76 


VIRGINIAN RY 3s 0 


sieet ese? sc eessecses # 


z 


¢= 
. 





“ip 


Sis*sss*p3sis™ 


RS3rkEErs 


= 
cal 
> 


33325 


stnsskesesesees 


tttz 
22828 
S232 
iti ee 
¢ 


tes 17 104.19) 
O4.17 104.19 Cri Ry Ss 27... 2 
“ ri 103.3 \Criap 4¥ys $2 A..°18 13 
T1074 107.16 107.8 107.10)CRIAP ev 4tys 0 "1 3S 
T 102.30 103.1 1031 1033 \criap 4, of 
~ecomes |CRIGP 45 OB reg . 


__ TREASURY BOND SAI BALES [ERI & 8 et. 
Sales in 


Cin Gas & E 2%qs 78. 12 
We Wok tow, Lat Se Gln Un Term Digs 74. 281 
1024 103 


102.4 — .12/CCCASt L 4¥gs ' 
102.4 102 1024 — 4°|Clev Elec Iii 3s 70 . ‘as 
105.6 105.6 105.6 — .11 \Clev Un Term Se 73... 
i 77 C. ni 


= 
~ 
— 
= 
= 
SSSEEESESE 
Pe ) 
222 
—s 


T103)0=— 103.3 


z 


WABASH digs M1 
Ward Bak Sigs 70 
West Shore 4s 2361 
Westen Ma 45 $2 
Western Un S& SI 
3, Western Un Ss 00 
ty Western Un 4tgs 90 
Wilson & Co E _ 4103% 103 =10) 
Wis Con 4s 4 "2 ey M%y My 
yy | Wis Cen 45 S40 Mo''S 4 4, 4, 
\q 0 reece SS SO Sa 


| FOREIGN BONDS 


2° 
= 


~ 
~~ 
g 


ly 


ES; 


sce 


‘: 


Lethe al 
2383 
Ss 


PiSSrLibe Flirt bieereeiy 


a2ag2 


oe 


NSAS Tire Line COMPANY 
w.c GUIRE. President. 


++ 


4 
101 % 1004) 
YEARLY RANGE (COMBINED) 


jee og age 9 101.99 Jan 
; 7 nu 06.08 Jan 


. 
- 


~ 
-eou-eu 


—E 


Pb 
RRRRERE 


eivrtess 
= 


3 

= 

_ 

ol 

= 
Ssse 
= 


fi 

Hi 

~ 
2 ix 


’ 
- 
. 
. 
= 


- 


z 


40 
nu 
4 
1 


sBS325 


f 


x 
10 


6 


é 
£ 
| 


: 
: 


3 \Clev U Term 4 





a7 


— 


Sales in Met 
"F000 High. Low. Last Cho. 


. 4 
2 
= 
al 
~ 
7~ 
= 
5 
7 
F 





Susser 


a 


E 
2. 
é 
: 
2 
' 


preferred stock then outstand- tose 
a NEstcres Smoking Repubttc of Pename 
und Bends. 


1S HEREBY GIVEN that the 
= which Arrears Certificates may 
for Republic of Panama 3% = 
ine Fund Bonds due May 1, 1987 
under Eo Offer of the Republic of Panama 


ee 1, 1941 has 
= 


teen tended from May 1, 1946 to May 1, 
The period for exchange of Scrip Certifi- 
bE for 3% External Sinking Pund Bonds 
the Republic in multiples of $50 principal 
smount also has been Ma 
1, 1946 to May 1. 1947 


time 


x from 


Tt is the intention of the Government not 
to rent ony further extension after May ~ 
1947 and the Government will consider an 
Scrip outstanding after that date as null 
and void. The Government urges the hold- 
ers of Arrears Certificates to egevenate them 
we yx prior to May 1, 

of the Offer and of “ne requi 
form of Letter of Transmittal may be és 
taiped from The Nationa! City Bank of New 
York, Fiscal Agent. Corporate Agency De- 
partment, 20 Exchange Place, New York 15. 
New York. 


REPUBLIC OF yer 
RICARDO A. MOR 
Minister of Pinance ~~ Treasury 
of the Republic of Panama 
Dated: New York, N. Y., May 1, 1946 


= 


NOTICE ag 4 eyacmace BY JASE BY CALL 
© Holders of 


Republic of Panama 


=e 


ier De 
January 31, 1940 
and 


given, pursuant “to and y 

with “the provisions wf Section 12-C 

Agreement dated January 3) 
540 between the Republic of Pasama and 
nk of the Manhattan Company, as Depos- 
Mary. that $11.! principal amount of the} 

iomds above-descri have 

lected by lot and are called for purchase at 
the principal amount thereof and accrued in 
terest at ‘“% per annum on June 1, 1846 as 


$1,006 Bonds 
M2930 
M3567 


M42%4 
M6251 
Bonds 


Nos M45 
mM4nz 
MM6 
moves 


M7742 
MAOR3 
M10504 


No Dee 
Holders and Owners of the Stamped Bonds 
A ated shall surrender them on 
. bearing the June 1, 


erest on sa called 
 canieegagrigneto aut ynadiins 


Republic of Paname 
av BANK OF THE MANHATTAN COMPANY 


As 
Pated New York, May a 
_ —. .._ 


ROCHESTER = COAL 
PANY 

The Board of Directors of Rochester & Pitts- 

Coal Com pny Geclared on April 24, 1946 

. a Ndivigend payabie out of ‘net profits for the 

per share on its Common 

Sree payable May & 1946 to oe ag of 
record at the close of business May 1. 

O'DONNELL ISELIN, . secretary. 


of Directors of Rochester & Pitts- 

a y declared om April 24, 1946 
6 oe a the 

of % on its Preferred at yable 
dere of pecord oh the 


close of business May 1. 1946 
O'DONNELL ISELIN, Secretury. 


—_—__— | Doehler - Jarvis 


Sales for the initial quarter of 
this year increased to $11,581,962 
from $7,662,624 in the correspond- 
bene three months a year Pa 
Earnings before taxes were $4,608 
788, compared with $2,820, 152. 
Provision for Federal taxes on in- 
come amounted to $1,751,000, com- 
pared with §2, 266, 800. 


my | OTHER CORPORATE REPORTS 


Barber Asphalt Corporation — 
March quarter: Net profit, $703, 
compared with net loss of $20,- 
121 for first quarter of 1945. 

Blaw -Knox Company — March 
quarter: Net profit, $28,936, 


equal to 2 cents a share on 
1,334,458 capital shares, after a foun ran 
tax credit of $235,000 computed|triputed the loss in part to low| 


ing and sold additional 4% per 
cent cumulative preferred shares} 
having an aggregate par value 
of $1,625,900. 

Westinghouse Air Brake Company 
and Subsidiaries —- March quar-| 
ter: Net profit, $2;413,245, equal }%7) 
to 76 cents a share, against 
$1,069,513, or 34 cents a share, 
last year. 


Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing 


MILWAUKEE, April 30 (>—») 
The Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing 
Company reported today for the|5e° 


first quarter of 1946 a net loss of| 


$2,250,956, against a net profit of 
for the same period in) 


Walter Geist, president, at-| 


at rate of 38 per cent and also/pijing caused by strikes in some) 
after a transfer of $450,000 from) o¢ ene plants of the company and 
reserves provided from income)|its suppliers as well as increases 


of prior years for war and post- 
war adjustments. Net profit for 
similar period last year was 
$738,154, or 55 cents a share. 

Bon Ami Company and sSubsidi- 
aries—March quarter: Net prof- 
it, $355,633, or 96 cents a share 
on class B stock, against $247,- 
840, or 69 cents a share, last} 
year. 

Calumet & Hecla Consolidated 
Cop: er Company and Subsidi- 
aries—-March quarter: Net prof- 





it, $98,923, or 5 cents a share, 
compared with $380,069, or 18) 
cents a share, last year. 


lin costs of material and labor. 


Du Pont de Nemours ‘ 


WILMINGTON, Del. April '30/3%* 
“P—E. I. du Pont de Nemours &1 
Co. reported today a net income of| 


$28,925,013 for the first three| 


months of 1946, equal to $2.43 a 
common. share, 
$18,796,997 $1.52 a share for the 


similar peri last year. 


BOND NOTES | 


Holders of , Republic of Panama 
larrears certificates issued under 


|\Continental Motors Corporation| the readjustment plan of Nov. 23, 
and Wholly Owned Subsidiaries! 1933, are being notified that the 


~Year to Oct. 31: 
$5,017,176, equal to $1.67 each 
on 3,000,000 shares of $1 par 
common stock, against $5,853,- 
473, or $1.95 a share, for 
ing fiscal year; net sales, $205,- 
952,443, against $246,212,225. 
Net working capital on Oct. 31, 
last, was $20,166,820, compared 
with $11,041,340 a year earlier. 
Corporation — 
March quarter: Net profit, $519,- 
895, or 50 cents each on 1,042,644 
capital shares, against $467,927, 
or 45 cents each on 1,049,685 
shares, last year. 

Easy Washing Machine ra- 
tion—-For 1945: Net profit, $387,- 
717, or 77 cents a share on com- 
bined Class A and B common 
stock, against $356,078, or 71 
cents a e, for 1944. 


Hinde & Dauch Paper Company— 


Net profit,|time for exchanging the certifi- 


cates for Republic of Panama 3 
per cent external bonds, due 1987, 
has been extended to May 1, 1947. 
Similar extension is provided for 
holders of scrip certificates, ac- 
cording A the National City Bank, 
fiscal 
i aa Suburban Water 
yey! has called for redemption 
June 1 at $110 and accrued divi- 
dends all 32,000 outstanding shares 
of 6 per cent preferred stock and 
will also redeem on that date the 
balance of $750,000 serial notes. 
Holders of first-mortgage 48 of 
Deerfield Packing Corporation, due 
1956, are being notified that $35,- 
000 have been drawn for redemp- 
tion on June 1 at 101% per cent 
and accrued interest, through the 
sinking fund, payment to be made 
at Marine Mi Trust Company. 


compared with a, 


352883: aeets 


=> 
~ 
sg 


ipo 
aes 
eae 
1998... 


} YEARLY RANGE 
1946—High 
Industrials 


Rails 
10.38 ‘=. 6 10251 Mar.12 100.95 Apr. 27/ 


Pgs Yen. 2 10156 Jan. 7 9682 Jan. 12 

COMBINED FOR THE LAST 12 MONTHS 
ba Date Low. pote ioe. ae, 

ieee + + 103.48 8 

Jen... : jena? 2 

1945— 

“ 191 97 
oo 72 ' 
99.70 25 


coe ONS 
101.06 18 


eereriTs 


= 
4 
=s 
ss 
+1 


= 
. 
3 


Fi; 
se 
a58 


sreny? 
EE 
t. 
: 


Suse B8leBs 


F 


x 
> 
bad 


~Seetane 
eags 


“ee 
e+ +*# ee @ 


~ 
5 
VESELASSSys3=-32 


Ssesscsssezesazcz 


>= 
=s¢ 


=< 


N. ¥. CITY BOND 
Deere & Co 2 


"F1000 High, Low. Last, _ Sie Bre Go ym 
1 1224y 12245 12249— We Dei Lack & Wine %.. 


= 
eal 
= 


~ 
- 
el 
J 


SSL2ECLSSSsesess=Tele FRBosse=2 OsssrResaseszs 


pitched Sefetnget 
SBSSISASSSUSSHsss 

oases 22S wetute wuss. wen 
SSSRSSLSSESsSS32e 


57S 3105p 105 105%) — 
17 104 106 104 = 


i 
: 


N ¥ City Bond is 0. 
DOMESTIC BONDS _ 


Sales in 
$1,000 High. | Low. Low. Last. 


Uulities 5 


ad 
or 


eal 





—e 
st. Crge. 


2-3 


103 5 


_ 
85 
= 


Bsssres cw 


CF waza 


1 
1 


> >>> rr rrr > 


| Nov. 
| Oct 


m T&T 23s 00 
m Tobacco Js @9..... 


" 4 106¥g Lely 136 
5 110% 110% 110 
2116 om 6 — 


10 o 102 10k 1028 102444 


4 aa 102 aye — 
{BRR 


| Aug. 
July 
June .. 


May 
jac Line st 45 $2... 


PUBLIC. AUTHORITY BONDS | IAC Line Mas 64. 


Dan ist 4 48.. 
[Atl Refin 2%—s 66 


S2eshese cy 


| FIRESTONE T&R 3s 61 ore. 10494 10424 
Fla E Cst Ss 74. “t 3 Bite 81% tite 


GT WOR RY Sigs 52... 3 120%) 120% ae 
|Gt Nor Ss 73....... - 10140 140 

Gt Nor Sigs n 90.. 59 10434 104% 100% 
|Gt Nor ao 104 10434 146%+ 
G tl : l4t%q 14q 14% 
reyhound 35 399....... 
wif M & Oh inc 21S. 11106 104 


G 
|G 
| HOUSEMOLD rue 10 10134 101% 101% —~ 
] 28 cs 8 + 
4 


i 
- 
: 
af 
3 


— =e ~ 
22esss= 28 


+l ileeee 4! 


8 
s 


est sSeeress 


PORT OF NEW YORK 


Ths, gen. and refund., Aug, 
refund., Dec, 
pen Se Se 
2s, | gen us. 
[tie gem. ane cofend ae jai Losey B&O 96 st 
igs, gen. and refund., Mar., ror B40 $e" t 89 78% TT, 784+ 
TRIBOROUGH BRIDGE 5 103% 103 103 — 


B&O 45 48......., sess 
2s, Feb., 1980 103% 104% 15 103% a 103% — 


te eve a 
B& $ ot 
nae. TURNPIKE 5 102% 102% sete 


107% 108 | Bang & Aroo cn 4s ‘Si. 
CALIFORNIA TOLL BRIDGE Bang & Ar cv 4s Si st. 10 104% 104% 104354 
ten rae aan Tat rg NM he tae Sis att a 
4 _ 
eee RIVER rere 108% | Beth ~ oped a's 8 103 102% 102% — 
Boston e 
in the Marine Co for ad-|Boston& Me 45 @.... 5100 
Bit travel, canon, All single | Sut when BH e ~ 1S.. eo 104\4 Be, 


men 17-26 apply now. 383 Madl-\pu) (Arch, fj id 15 Site Site SiMe 
Ave. Bush Term Se SS...... 2 102%y 102 


MA B40 ist -~ 48 st.... 
. 1104 113% ae Oe Ol As cccceste 
B40 95 ut C 
ior 1 |B&0 2000 a“ o.. 


udson Coal Ss 62 
|Hud & Man a, ® oe Th aa 
Mudd Man inc Ss S57... By MN YG 


/TLL BELL TEL . Sl 2 10634 106% | 
Tit Term RR 4s 70.. 1 


D 
(2.708, aus Cen Ist He 5. S.. 


Cen St L 3N9s ‘in: 


102 |ICACSLENO Ss 63 A.. 27 100% 100 100344 


TRANSACTIONS ON THE NEW YORK 


# eeectescs 


5 104, 104% 10tte+ 7 


FF 


1 10414 10614 104%. 
oe oO ee 


101% # 


ie 


” 


— 


coe 
Ra 


552933585? sr7*+sse3ss 


é 
ore. 


55*% 
=~ 98 * 
tf 
: 
i 


333 
823 
2 bs 
yee 

$33 

3333 
+i 


< 
= 


os 

cs 
= 

ve 


222 
see 
ot +) ee. ee 

3555 
Pi. 
SEE 

= 

ii 


ters 


5 533*S38 


e 


zz 
<< 
Om 
= 
=) 

~ 

=3e 
os 


ro 


= 

. 

a 
*-. 


. 
-—--— ew 


a= Fe! 
: Ss a 


zzz 

<== 

zzz 

=== 
os 
= 

oe 

= 


= 
~ 


= 

=< 

a 

= 
z===z== 
222 
as 

€ 

= 


Sgtege: : 


zz 
<< 
zz 
== 

2's’: 
gs 
~~ 


<3 
Ss 
#3 


Se 
23 
fe 

~se2 


= 
Sttcz 
= 


8%, 87% 
Nor Sta Pow 2%s 73. 23 198 104 


aay 40°18 1 25% 25% 25%4— 
Ohio Ed is ° of pe 1 10625 


Okla G&E es 7S... 
2 108V) 108% 1081 
. St ior ior” 107 “ 
10 109% 107 107%4— 
10 104% 10414 1041— 
0.4 10 116% i16 116 


ms, 


4 126 126% 1264+ 
11 106g 106%q 1064q— 
1 vere sev ro 


5 
. 10 104% sont torte 
674 4142 1a a. 
-. 7 104M, 104% 104%) — 
; b 1st 13st 133% 
ue ue = 1 


Efe, 


237 


TOCK EXCHANGE 


CR 


i 


1%) ‘ANTWERP we wes 
* Australia 40 % 


=" | BRAZIL 6%, 26-57 ot 
1% | Grazit 39s Ser 17 


‘4 
% 
ty 
' 
4 


t Hie a +3 
ma 109%4 109" 
' 1a 1008 102% 1028+ 


5 71 
'4# 4© #H 


Australia Se SS 


Grazit B¥gs Ser 18... 
Brazit }igs Ser 23 
Brazi! 394s Ser 4 
Buen A 4%q5 77 

Buen A 4%as 7s 


CANADA & #0 


y Chile Mtg Bk 6s élasdt 
t 


Chile 6s of 


Wy Chile & 60 asd 


% Costa Rica Ts SI 


’ 
Chile @s 62 asd | 
Coloma ks 70 


eV 


\@ Cuba 4¥ys 49 


Vq | Denmark Sigs 55 
Vy | Denmark 41 
ba Dom Sts 


2] creex és 68 pt pd..t 


nm % 
% | KREUGERGT 


0045 ‘| MINAS GER 6¥gs 58 st 
103% 103%g— % 
‘ite 
mM PERU Ts 39 
1Y2| peru ist 6s 60 


| seR@S CTS SL 7s @2t S 
% URUG al 4% 19... 


Se 


114! ration of ownership 


vy 


it3| maturity 
314 | reorganized under the Bankruptcy Act, or securities 


DENMARK 6 42 3 9%) %%) H— 
4101 Wi i 
5 Wm 


$103 102% Pend 
16% 16% 16% — 
3m fm 
S 41% 41% 41%— 


7108 106 105 
5 10St4 10514 1054+ 


72 2% 2%+ 
% 25% 25% 2Se—- 
$ 25vy 29 2%4— 


2 4. 46'y— 


1g 15% 15+ 
1n wm 


. a + Certificate. wa WIth decla- 
Selling flat on account of 
tSelling flat for reasons other than de- 

@Matured bonds; negotiabdility impaired by 

*In bankruptcy or receivership er being 


ext 
Ss Stet"? 


NORWAY 4tqs 65 
Norway 4s 63 

. . ? 
Peru 24 6s 1961 t 


Rio de Jan hh 4% t.. 4% 


xin Ex interest 


default 
| fault. 


assumed by such companies. 


lars. 


Contineed From Page 
Range 1946. Stock ard Div'd Sis. Net 
ne 4 Range 1908, Stet ond O's Se eee, | High Low: tn Dol 100s. First. High. Low. Last. Choe, 
—S.&. High. Low, in atlanta | 


i 
a 


ip 
i 


3 


x 
HH 
i. 


Range 1946. 
High. ‘ow. 
204% 199 sia 


— 


EFEsE*5 


1946. 
Low. 
x” 
” 


- 
_ 


Univ Pict 
Univ Pict oe hehe] 


Pd 
#3 5 
Fe 


; 
¥ 3 


Sgengy 3* 


fit. 


arr 


2? 


z 
tr 


: $853.6: F 


t oeltentioad 
Ne NN Oem 
- 


2 
: 
+ 


fi 


SEzscretls 
st 
33828 
ae se re 
FE 
SeS5s¥se 
ij 
Zo 


iii 
et: 
3 

2 

2 

i 


+ 


ot FR 
ainbrgaeyiiital 
ee #3 
fig 
353° 
: 


a8.e8E8 ovr 


os 
~~ 


+4 +141 


Bs fees s 


Freer FT 


i 
B25% 
jj 

3 

‘ 


‘Soe set Fess 


Virgi 
Visking Cp Al 
WAB RR of i” 
Waldorf S$ 


Sr 

# 

geax 
sz 
1+ 


#32°5* 


(TTT+F iF 


_ 
- 
Sas 248 


i 


& 


5 
B32°55F*E2EE 


bei 
*3252**3*3 


= 


c 
> 
a> 


ose 
oa 


See H" “S352 a be “3 


at ta De bal tlt bg 


HEEL EEE: 


$5 
#37 

Seggetecses 
Ssasrge2"ys 


=@ 


sez 


“ee 


23 
s* 


Leal 

_— ~ 
— 
SS 


: 


527 


2 
: 


ek 


stectds 


? 


——_—- 


. 
seF7st. 


ize 


>f 


a3 a 


i 
a 


58% 45 


#2 


+ 10 
2 


—e 
= 


\ 


32332 


iti+ 


tepessc 


$3°553509°2°H|i 
a 


and 


Serss8essusacsegcesye esis 


$3583%35*85°5%s55 


53 


2s 
F 


a3" 
ef 3 ef ~~ “808 se 


Se 
++ 


2s 


“32 


53553*33 


os 


se 


- 


5 * 
10S re wane” St! prpfSt 10 104 
ae oe 10 


White 


- ion Willys-Overland 
16% Wilson & Co = 

2 sore Wilson-Jones 
wee = x 
Wiwrth(FW) 
sms Wirt P&M i 2 
91v_ Wor P&M prpfé 
Wright Aero 69 
2014 Wyand Wor 


21%y YORK CORP 
Young SoghW 
61%4 Youngst ShaT 


34% ZENITH RAD le 
10% Zonite Prod , 


White Met 1b.. 


os” a8 


Wheeling Sti le 


104 = 104 
35% 


White Dent 1.40 | 
Sew Mach 10 
Wilcox OFF} 20... 8 
UM 


1 + 
lite 
Bh 


ty 
15%) 16% 
11% ive 
uM 


i? 


#. S856 se% 2& obE cE 


P. 
% 


‘s 
0% 
62 
" 
a7V— 


S22 


434 


4 23% 
6 0% 
0 
3 


+i 


4 
2. 10 70% 
26% 


we 
14 


Youngst Sti Or 1 


4 
We ll 





APRIL SHOWS RISE 
IN STOCK TRADING 


Turnover Largest for Month 
Since 1943—Bond Total Is 
Smallest Since 1917 


Trading on the New York Stock 
Exchange 'n April expanded slight- 
ly over the previous month and 
was the largest for a co 
ing month since 1943. 

Sales were above the million- 
share mark in every full day's ses- 
sion with the exception April 
28 and 29, when trad dropped 
to 999,000 and 995,000 , the 
amallest totals of the month. The 
heaviest daily turnover was 1,705,- 

70 shares on April 9. Sales for 
the month, as compiled by THE 
NEW YORK TIMES, amounted to 
31,426,715 shares, compared with 
25,663, 765 in March and 28,270,442 
in April, 1945. 

The stock markets ended higher 
on the month despite the decline 
in prices from around the peaks of 
the r. Prices advanced sharply 
in the first half of April, with the 
industrial average at the best level 
since January, 1937. The com- 
bined averages at 144.15 on April 
17 failed to penetrate the year’s 
top of 144.71, which was the high- 
est point since 1931. 

Prices weakened in the 
part of the month on strike news, 
although intermittent rallies led 
by selected issues enabled the com- 
bined averages to register a gain 
of 3.01 points and thus increase the 
year's g“in to 7.51 points. 

Transactions in stocks for April 
and from Jan. 1 this year compared 
as follows with the corresponding 
periods in previous years back to 
1926: 


STOCKS (SHARIS) 
From Jan.1 
$142.693.422 
966.175 
76,401,704 


4 


$= 
8 


3 
a 


é 


383 


~ 
>= 
s 


Sa282eses=28 


35383 
23352233 


ee 


s= 


1 


aae 
wew 
ore 


3328 
3 


E 
o82: 
332835 


t=] 
3 


BOND MARKET 


Although bond dealings last 
month increased slightly over 
March, the volume for April was 
the smallest for a corresponding 
month since 1917. Transactions 
for April amounted to a par value 
of $122,336,600, divided as follows: 
Corporation, $104,967,900; United 
States Government, $10,317,700; 
foreign, $7,051,000. 

Trading increased $17,318,400 over 
the previous month but decreased 
$124,139,800 from the total of 
April, 1945. The largest day's busi- 
ness was $11,954,500, on April 11, 
due to heavy turnover in United 
States Government issues. The 
smallest was $3,118,400 on April 1. 

Corporation bonds, including the 
speculative rails, were lower; the 
rail average was approximately 2 
points down, and the combined 
averages were off more than a 

int for the widest losses since 
ast August. Treasury issues weak- 
ened sharply in the largest month- 
ly turnover since October, 1939. 
Foreign loans were mixed. 

Bond dealings for April and 
from Jan. 1 this year compared as 
follows with previous years back! 
to 1926: 

From Jan. 1 
$543,615,100 

986 950.850 


$122 e680 


bd 
816,496,050 
779,126,575 
566 600 300 
300 


os 
~ 
= 


S2SnE555 
BSSS8EE8 
8323383282335 


223 948 000 
247 597 400 
715.668 990 
397 462.400 
593 372.108 
208 A048 850 


CURB EXCHANGE 


Trading in stocks on the New 
York Curb Exchange last month 
also increased slightly over the 
previous but bonds were slower. 
Transactions in stocks aggregated 
13,190,000 shares, compared with 
10,810,000 .n March and 7,410,000 
in April, 1945. The bond turnover 
amounted to $7,400,000, against 
$8,250,000 in the previous month 
and $14,840,000 in April, 1945. 

Transactions in stocks and bonds 
for April and from Jan. 1 were as 
follows: 


= 
= 
~ 


2 


3638 
~—e2e 
veo. 


st eee 
—— 


3 
8 


STOCKS (SHARES) 
arty 
$13,190,000 
7,410 000 
BONDS (PAR VALUE) 
April Year to Date 


ie T1840, 000 #73 000 


DIVIDENDS ANNOUNCED 


ear to Date 
$45 270,000 


1946 
1948 38.777 200 


Company 
Borden Co 
Coty. Inc 
Peter Paul 


uneo Press ° | 

Beier ty" Inc pie Her 

“Three additional shares for each sha 

to effect & four-for-one spiit-up. sadn, 

Extra 

United Molasses 7 

Final 
1M 

Irregular 


United Molasses 
United Gas Imp 


> 
s 


tial 


Int 
Wikee-Bar Lace Mig (new) 25c 


av 
~ 


Acadia Atl & Ref 


4m Rolling Mill 
Biauners, Ine 
Biaw-Knox 


Boston W Hose & R 
Braniff Airways 
ou 


= Am pee 

wckeye Pipe L 2 
Canada Bread 

Ca Foundries & F "A" 

Chambersbur ngineerin, 
Chapman Valve Mig pf 

Chestnut Hill RF 


Susbe 


10¢ 
"z: 
$3.50 


The 


iSe 
Se 


40c 
$1.25 
$1.50 


Sew bu SBVSu seca 


AAP AAAARARADAAARBARAAA RAR As 


? 
iit ee) ee 
> > 


Corrugated Paper 
pf 


rrorereereverevereres 


Bene 
200 ©©O2L0>: © © © LOO 


Y 

Box pf 
“ge 

Dé 


udson y 

umble Ot! & Ref 

met Accept pf 

int! Bus Mch 
Mohawk Carpet Mills 
=e = Corp 
Natl Tea “o . océeé 
Neisner Bros 
Phillips Petroleum .... 
Servel Ine , 
Standard Cap & Seal 

ft Intl . se 

voll Bw 
Un Aircraft Corp pf 
Un Fa Inv pf a 
U S Stee 
United States Stl 7% pf. $1 
Vanedium Alloys sti 
Wiisll Led 
Woolworth (FW) ADR 


a 
OW’ Hee YOU 


~ 





b=] Hts eA 
SPSUERES Says shee? 


4 
8B 


¥ 
© ® ®© COLLOC 000 


ereresterrererrrrrererye 
ate BS nsecesnspepess ins pree 

reer rerereey 

Iu SSEKESES 


s%fa2 


pr 


DIVIDEND MEETINGS TODAY 


Atlas Powder 
r City Manufacturing. 
ristol Myers 
tnental ty (Chicago). 
1 Light a tiection, 
American Indemnity (MN. ¥.) 
‘s BP 
Standard Oi), N. J. 


$so| Without bids was misleading so 


ow one of “benevolent neutrality” 


j|ket. Word was then passed to Ex- 


Apri! 
A 


~ 
ee 
> 


FINANCIAL 


United Aircraft Corporation Promotes 
Gwina, Beisel, Lyman to Vice Presidents 


William P. Gwinn Rex B. Beisel Laaren D. Lyman 


At the annual meeting of stock- assure continuous operations with |tions, on a scale unequaled since 
ost 20,000) September, 1945, with a total of 
East Hartford,/employes for the rest of this year) ¢942 639,000 in nine issues of new 
William P.|“and even to the middle of 1947.”/ bonds being offered for public sub- | Industrial 


holders of the United Aircraft\its present force of a 
Corporation in 
Conn., yesterday 
Gwinn, general manager of the) 
Pratt & Whitney Aircraft division; 
Rex B. Be‘sel, general manager of 
the Chance Vought Aircraft divi- 
sion, and Lauren D. Lyman, in 
charge of public relations, were 
elected vice presidents. 

Mr. Gwinn joined the company 
nineteen years ago and became 
general manager in 1944. Mr. 
Beisel joined Chance Vought in 


prospects 
in the present tax structure. 


said the trend is toward larger- 


the situation is not clear and that 


when it became a division of the! pendability. 
company three years ago. Mr. 
Lyman was on the news staff of| what the cost of the recent wage 
THE NEW YORK TIMES nineteen/increase would be, Mr. Rentschler 
years, during eight of which he/estimated it would increase the 
was aviation editor. In 1935 he|payroll by about $8,000,000 a year. 
won the Pulitzer Prize for report-| In regard to the $100,000,000 of 


ing. He joined United Aircraft in|cash and Government securities! Groups 


1938 as assistant to the president/held by the company, he said that 


and later was appointed to his\it was hoped the company would! ratroads 


use part of these assets to acquire 


present position. 
the Government 


Frederick B. Rentschler, chair-| from 
man, 
company has orders on han 


d to ties. 


U.S. BONDS SLUMP 
IN ‘FREE’ MARKET 


Continued From Page 37 
changed hands on Sept. 11, 193 
at the start of the European war. 

Meanwhile over-the-counter Gov- 
ernment bond dealers busily were 
reviewing their restriction rule and 
by 2 P. M. the word had been| 
passed from an informal “execu-| 
tive committee” to the telephone|inc., 
trading rooms that the eight thir-|4end on the common stock with 


;the declaration of 20 cents a share,| 
ty-seconds limit was off. Trading | payable on May 22. Last year| 
began immediate] 


and the market |stockholders received 15 cents each| 
began to rally slightly from the in May and December. 
cone reached on the Ex Ford Motor of ( , 

The Victory 2% of December, | 
1972-67, 
the list, 
under 103, were quoted 103% bid, the class A and B 
103 3/32 asked, for a loss of %|payable in June. 
point. General losses were 5/16 to'was 25 cents a 
7/16 point for the list as a whole. | prior to which 

The initiative in breaking the|in September, 1945. 
price restriction apparently came 
from the Stock Eechanes wile. United Gas Improvement 
during the recent period of declin-| The 
in 
States bonds, had found bonds of-| 
fered there without a taker be- 
cause of the fluctuation limit. This 
situation, it was said, was brought 
to the atention of Treasury and 
Federal Reserve officials to whom 
it was suggested ,that publication 
of quotations showing offerings 


included about two hours in which 


over the telephone. 
| Banking quarters generally ap- 


9 ‘market was thought to be a con- 
‘|structive step for the future, 


DIVIDEND NEWS 


Coty, Inc. 


ich had broken a shade/ferred action on the dividend on 


reduced number of shares out- 
standing following the recent plan 
\for exchange of assets for the 
company’s common stock. UGI 
|paid a dividend of 50 cents on Dec. 
15, 1945, and one of 35 cents on 
Feb. 28, 1945, declared in Decem- 
ber, 1944 and charged to surplus 
in that year. 

Following the directors’ meet- 
ing, it was announced that under 
the plan for exchange of certain 
toward any move which might eer > hie aoe Vy 
undertaken to provide a freer mar-| shares were tendered for exchange 


isting of 93,775 units of te 
change brokers that if they found |°)n* - 
bids and offers which could be | snaree er As 6 result of the 
matched to effect trades, they) ge. 2 company's stock in 


the hands of the public t 
were to be executed, regardless of P amounts 
the “eight thistevescende rule" to 1,566,337 shares, the announce- 
which over-counter dealers were! states. 
observing. 

Abrogation bf the rule then be- 


long as actual business was being 
done in the over-the-counter trade. 

Reactions from the two Federal 
entities were said to have indicated 
that with the pressing needs of 
war finance past, their attitude 





_ Carruthers Attorney for Road 
came @ matter of self-protection| Louis J. Carruthers has been ap- 
for the over-the-counter dealers,|pointed general attorney of the 
since they obviously could not/Pennsylvania Railroad with of- 
make trades at levels above those 
prevailing elsewhere. Total turn- 
over in the dealer market, which|terday. He has been general at- 
is not officially recorded, was only|torney of the Long Island Railroad 
slightly heavier than on a norma!l/|since 1935 and wi 
day, though the day's aggregate'capacity. 





RAGES 


SERIES OF TEARS 
RAILROADS (28 stocks) 
vale 


STOCK MARKET AVE 


APRIL, 1946 


| 
i 


BE23uz248 
ww 
§5 
- = 
i ee 
PEEYESEES, 


April 
April 
April 


tt 334 


~ 
- 


ScBSeewSs 
EE guesuexs 


ss 


Sense Betsr 
= 


S8Seu-2Rs 


Zee 
PFs UTEEETER 
Spesstesrs E ENeows SRRBR 
2B 


pril 
April 
April 


» 
i= 
- 
~ 
2 
sos 


i 
B53 
$3 
BS23 ISustes 


144.23 


28 


167 


S822essacsensses* 

$385553 
Sseusesze 

-—< 
gSE5% 
BESECE 
SySeestss 
=> >. 
gS: 


8 
s 
: 
o 
8 
Sy 
83 
zc 
ss 


SSSSEE SESSssssssssEss 


- 
— 
- 
~ 
= 


ssss 
B2sererss asesks 
22 
28S 
2 
Es 
—-.& 
555 
Sess 


FF++L LL i+ +4441 lett ieete 


SSSESSSSE SESsssssssessssss 
33 


SESsesees 


- 
£ 
7 


ce 
> 
3 


a 

w 
Sefsrn 

z 


uyay 8 


sSu88ck 


H 


SSSSVSeuwSR SoSUS.i Se 


RSezess= 
Sgscy 


SousBess. 


cS 
ea 
3 SEER 
z 
= 338s 
S 


+++ 

ee 
332 
B 


+ 
+i! 


S8atsese ses: 


+ 
~ 
& 
z 


2 
5 
3 
g 
: 
g 


cet 
> 
vv 
2 


1++ 
ee 
4 
532 


j 

~ 
- 
= 


3822 
Se RES 

SSSt as 
Seeszeys css 


++I 


Sezkseysszes 


rN, 


(it+i+ 
~ 


> 
~ 
-oe 
- 
» 
(e+?! 
eww 8 


‘ 


bs 


- 
oe 
= 


: 
SSS62S5 aS55 


BSIsS2scs 


x 


SBVERERU eses 
SR. St gob? 


cans Bes 


3 
S~ 
23 


2 
~ 88 = S8BZB8 S BSStEs 


RES-zar5 2825 


5 


SS .08E2 oan k 
~ 
*. 


BERSEEEEE BEEESESEESE 
¥ 


Seen Yer: 
Skbseezes Seeseuseee 


Merritt rT 
EGe BEBUSIEES EErereEEEENEE 


tte i LLiti 
SBtessask eeehee 


w SSESSESEs SReR 


: 


ee 


Ti FEA 


a 


eee 
5 _? 


+ 
E 
5 


ses 


BSNae 
8 
- 


onéees 


~ 
ww 
~++e+ #144 


=: 
e858 
saskstss sees 


vertys.c uous! 


wen. orer 


Beeeee 
SBerssge 
—- 

32 

= 

tt 


oo 


5 
3 


USSS= 


3 
a a en 
g 


252° 


- 
ee 


RSS 


Ce etehent 
bmg Ft ot we 
- 
J 


P++el LL ieie+ieseel 
- ne 


Ege suze 


4Zesce 


ee et et en ee et ee 


BeG BSE=ESScREse 
se" vegrtsaces 


Ot ee et ee ee 


BEE Ge 
Ss5 & 
sire E22 


S55 
Sop 
335: 


ot 

SEBRSESUS SuRszeHezerresce 
+Het Lite 

Bebiscees Sh2seeesc8 

E 

. 

BEESERES FEES 

¥ssszre5 

+litesee +144 


~ 
3 


He said that tax carry-back! scription, led all other groups in|p. 
will benefit the company/the month's new bond flotations. | Foreisn 
materially if there is ‘no change|ederal Land Bank bonds totaling 


With regard to the helicopter, he) senior financing for the month. 


type engines. As for jet propulsion) classified and compared for three 
and rockets, Mr. Rentschler said) years as follows: 


it is possible five years will be re-|,.4 
latter | quired to determine what will be) Federa! 
|1932, assuming the managership|the standard for efficiency and de- eq} Home Loan Bank 


In answer to a question as tO canada 


certain | Pubitc 
told the stockholders that the| leased plants and equipment facili-|“*""“*" - 
Total 


virtually no business was done | $153,034,000 


peared undisturbed by the flurry sponding month of 1945, and were 
in the Government bond market.|the largest for any April since 
| While informed quarters considered| 1930, when $209,227,000 in seven- 
likely some further price adjust-|teen 
ments, the restoration of the free|Last month's equity financing Was) pia freight case “ 


The board of directors of Coty, « 
yesterday increased the divi-| Industria 


| Miscellaneous ... 


| Directors of the Ford Motor|™ 
e longest-term bonds in|Company of Canada yesterday de-| Tote! 


stock normally|102 issues of new bonds totaling tional Association of Commodit 
The last payment) $1,235,182,000 were marketed here, | Exchanges and Allied Trades, Inc 
share on Feb. 16 against eighty issues aggregating |to represent the Commodity Ex- 
25 cents was paid/$1,413,971,000 in the corresponding change of New York City, Ody H 


United Gas Improvement/for 127 new issues, compared with 
§ prices for long-term United Company declared a 65-cent divi-|$159,329,390 for fifty-four new of- 
dend on the common stock, pay-|ferings in the same four months a 
able on June 29. The companylyear ago. 
stated that the dividend is on ajwere the largest for the 


\ficea in Pennsylvania Station, New 10 
York City, it was announced yes-|\) 


| 


continue in thaty ' 


if 





| 


| 


18) 3 | Shares 


3t| Mar 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. 


PANG AP 


The value of bonds called before 
Bond Flotations Were Best for 


maturity for payment in April, al- 
though smaller than a year ago, 
Month in 10 Years—Stocks 
at 16-Year Top 


was the largest for any month 

since January. The total of $200,- 

577,000 compared with $140,480,- 

000 in the preceding month, $651,- 

oi 796,000 in January and $406,876,- 
my, 000 in April, 1945. 

Flotations of new bonds in April| Industrial bonds, for the first 

were the largest for that month) time this year, led all other groups 


{in bond retirements last month, 
since 1936, with the total of $667,-| 114. total of $71,516,000. This 


001,000 for thirty-one issues the| wag the largest amount retired in 
top for any month since October,/any month since January, when 
1945, when $855,423,000 in thirty-| $72,112,000 was redeemed. Prepay- 
nine issues reached the market. A nodes gutun be ne toe pecan — 
year in April, 2,180,000 in 

enip tive oe ay were mar-|months, placed second in April 
keted, while in 1936, when the total] With ® total of $48,072,000 in bond 
exceeded last month’s, $886,087,000 | "°ce™Ptons. 

in sixty-three issues were floated.|. 1"¢ following table shows the 


various classifications of bonds 
Financing for industrial corpora-| -siied for payment in April before 


maturity in three yeara: 
(000 omitted) 
Class 


Public utility . 
ilroad 


’ 
State & municipal 
Miscellaneous . 


Total ... _ $200,577 $406,876 $119,781) 


’ Prepayments of bonds in the 
New bond offerings in April are last four months aggregated $1,- 


140,814,000, compared with $1,356,- 
261,000, a new high record for the) 
1945 a period in 1945. 


se RAIL OFFICIAL ASSAILS 
hse 335) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT 


$647 001 $502,180 $55,350 7 } 

The new bond issues are classi-: WASHINGTON, April 30 (4 
fied and compared for April ac-,R. V. Fletcher, a vice president of 
cording to number in the table the Association of American Rail- 
below : roads, criticized today what he 
is4| said was the Department of Jus-| 
‘\tice’s attitude toward general 
agreements among railroads. He) 
5 | testified before the Senate Inter-| 
'2 |state Commerce Committee on the) 
S | Bulwink'e Bil) to exempt railroads 
10 (from the anti trust laws in the fix-| 
ing of rates by agreements. He, 
asserted that the department .“says, 
you must never, never make an 
agreement.” 
#ietcher said that “those! 
who nave been contending that! 
Congressional action on the Bul- 
.winkle sill should be postponed”) 
until after the United States Su- 
preme Court has decided the Geor- 
are really advo- 
cating regulation” by the Depart- 
ment of Justice. 
“The «ffort,” he said, “is to de- 


$217,000,000 placed second in the 


(000 omitted) 
ine 

. $242,639 
. 217,000 

96.500 
67 000 
37. 
5 


Groups 
ustrial 
Land Bank 


912 
950 


State and municipal 
Public utility 
dian 


1946 
J 
1 
3 
1 
15 
2 


1645 
Industrial 
| Land Bank 


Lean Bank 
nicipal 


: 
Federal Home 
State and mw 


7 
utility 7 


1 868 

Stock Flotations Heavy 
Stock flotations increased to 
or fifty new issues 
from $76,752,000 for 


in April 
in the corre- 


twenty-six issues 


offerings were marketed. 
the largest for any month since 
July, when $259,320,000 in thirty- 
seven emissions reached the mar- 
ket. /feat the jurisdiction of the Inter-| 
The new stock financing in April| state Commerce Commission and 
is classified and compared f0F|jodge authority in the Department 
three years as follows: lof Justice to regulate the carriers 
(000 omitted) of the cvwuntry.” At another point 

jhe exciaimed. “God help us if we 
jare placed under the Justice De- 
| partment.’ 


rou 1946 
$148 .623 
Public utility 44 


195) | 1844 

attire 

1.288 

Total $153,094 $76,752 $68,121 
The number of new stock issues 

is compared below: 


McKendrew, Lewine Nominated | 
son Edward L. McKendrew, vice 
aipresident of Armand Schmoll, 
3 Inc. and Jerome Lewine, senio 
= i ‘partner in H. Hentz & Co., have 
«= =6©% =! been nominated for positions on 
Inf the first four months of 1946,|:he board of directors of the Na- 
y| 





1046 
47 
aT 


Groups | 
Industria! 
Public utility 


oo 
22 
5 
iscellaneous 1 


jLamborn, president of the Ex- 
shange, announced yesterday. 


To Sell $2,000,000 Certificates 

The Western Maryland Railw: . 
Company has invited bids on 
$2,000,000 equipment trust certifi- 


cates, Series J, to be dated June 15 
since 1929, when $1,241,012,715 in and ‘payable $200,000 annually 


261 issues ‘was marketed. June 15, 1947 to 1956, subject to 


Be a specialist! Enlist in the approval of the Interstate Com- 
Marine Corps for two, three or) merce Commission. The funds will 
four years and learn radio, avia-| be used in part payment for twelve 
tion, drafting, ete. Apply 883 Madi-|steam locomotives and tenders 
son Ave. costing $2,600,000. ' 


period of 1945. 
Stock offerings for the first four 
months of 1946 totaled $417,207,065 


| 
| 


| 


This year’s flotations 
riod 


EXCHANGE TRADING 


FOR APRIL | 

The following table vives the amount of the dealings in the stocks 
from which the average. <® computed, as weil as the total dealings) 
in the raile and industriai_ .ad the combined trading in both classes 
of issues and the number of the latter appearing in the daily and 


weekly transactions: 


_ STOCK 


APRIL, 1906 


Chee 
r-——BSlocks in Averages——, 
p=) 


Industrials. Stocks. 
S10 $6 530 


80 


au 
Industrials Sth 


44 


Stocks Deait in 
910 


Aprii— 


3 


33 
552222 


£8¢ 
seuete?, 

$22 

baz 


2 
3 


7 


= 
2 
+ +1++4! 


$I 


ls 


| 


3 
=) 
qi 


Week 


| 


SR8358' 


iil 


~~ 
= 
ce 


preeeeeens | <6 
sé 
| 888582) 
B33 
s 
823 
pitiet 


= 
- 
> 
3 
s 


13 


| 
-! 
> 


| 
be 
8 
~~ 
B's 
~ 
2) 
i 


— 
= 
= 


s=2 


no 
80 
1 

74,920 


1+?++ 


83 
119.460 


-ae 
meee 


. 


$333 


7, 
1. 
+ 
1, 
Y 


8 £22 


. 129.030 
eee 56.7980 50.7 107,570 86 490 
' EXCHANGE CLOSED GOOD FRIDA 
31.200. 25,780 56,980 30, 780 
jis.et0 "464.520 303,008 


- 
— 


2 $885 


+ 
> 


Suscss! 
2 


=| 
2 
1! 


yet .a50 


“41.008 89.960 
50.510 99.480 
44.790 107.100 


inte 


42,130 
576,250 


(860 
Te 


“TTL.o90 
2.406,770 


5 4,300,170 


~ 
4 
al 


S*e*ere 
SERESE 
S32zz 
+iti+ 


ee 
- 
= 


i 
g 
es! 


= 


83 
+, ++ 


| 


167,730 
2.002 $20 
4.297.720 


ele 
&\3 
zis 
+> 

els 


wre 
29.972,722 


8 
2 
é 

|3| 


April, 1905. 3,150,920 


OF STOCK TRADING ON N. ¥. STOCK EXCHANGE 
Ween Month No. Issues Day Hour 

2, Nov. 2, October. Nov. 7, Oct. 29, 
i929 1930 1929 1929 1920 19 1929 

16.410.930 4,867,090 *49,490.540 141,668,410 1,124,090, 980 1,061 15.000,000 | 

*Three and one-half days of trading. tApproximated. 


RECORD OF LARGEST VOLUME 


Saturday 
M 


ay 3. Year 


The following table gives the par value of the daily and weekly 


dealings in the varicus classes of bonds: na 
Ave. Price 


2 
ts 
Es 


Sze222' 


eessti 
333335 


7 


305 000 
$1,917 500 
$284 500 
000 

464.000 
000 


a 


388 
t++14 


| 


i 
3 
F 


ast 3| onan 


§: 


3 
iii 
g=8558 


BEte 


$2232 
2323 
- 


tts 


000 
210.000 


8! 

8) 
5 
t 


| 
| 


& £382 
3 833312 
+ +111 
@ 8833 


Za 
a 


SaBE38) 8 
23888815 
! 

ah 


++i 


| 


3 
oe E 


06 
- B 


$10,517,700 
April, 1948 $534,400 $946,476 ,400 
RECORD OF LARGEST VOLUME OF BOND TRADING ON ¥. ¥. STOCK EXCHANGE 


fits Sk witha Sk OH, 


-~iM 


wes ars 


a 


Greer Hydraulics, Inc. 


| 
| 
| 


Price $3.37'2 per Share 


TOWNSEND, GRAFF & Co. 


The Shawinigan Water 


and Power Company 


NOTICE OF REDEMPTION 


To: The Holders of the First Mort- 
ge and Collateral Trust Sinking 
und Bonds Series “K”". 3%%, of 
he Shawinigan Water and Power 


Company 

NOTICE ts hereby given that B near 
suant to the terms of the Trust Deed 
of Hypothec, Mortgage and Pledge 
from Sopeees ater and Power 
Company to Montreal Trust Company 
as Trustee dated October 31, 1927, and 
deeds supplemental thereto, securing 
the above mentioned and to the 
terms of the said Bonds, e Shawin-, 
igan Water and Power Company will 
redeem all its Ga ey | First Mort- 

ace and Collateral Trust Sinking Fund) 

nds Series “K”, 344% (which would, | 
according to their terms, mature for 
a on gesruney Ms 1976) on the 

rst day of June, 1946, at 10444%% of 
the principal sum thereof with accrued 
interest on said Bonds to the said first 
day of June, 1946, upon presentation 
and surrender of such Bonds, accom- 
panied in the case of coupon ds by 
all interest coupons a ing there- 
to which mature on and after Au 
1, 1946, at the principal office of 
Royal Bank of Canada in the City 
Montreal, Province of Quebec, Dom- 
inion of Canada, or at the holders’ 
option at the office of the Company's 
Paying Agent, Agency of The Royal 
Bank of Canada im the Borough of 
Manhattan, City and State of New 
York, United States of America. 

AND NOTICE is further hereby given 
that tn case the Bonds hereby called 
for redemption are not presented for 
redemption on the said first day of 
June, 1946, afl interest on the said 
Ronds will cease to accrue from and 
after the said first day of Juce, 1946 

Dated at Montreal this 30th day of 
April, 1946 


T 


e 
of 


THE SHAWINIGAN WATER AND- 


COMPANY. 


HH. G. BUDDEN, 
Secretary, 


NOTICE OF IMMEDIATE PAYMENT 


Holders of the above Sonds may 
surrender such Bonds and coupons at 
the principal office of The Royal Bank 
of Canada, Montreal Canada. or at 
Acency of The Royal Bink of Canada, 
New York. N.Y... at any time on or after 
Aoril . 1946, and receive the principal 
of avd oremiam and interest accrued 
to June 1, 186, on the Bonds so 
surrendered. 


POWER 


ated annteineestnin iene ee 
To the Holders of 


PENNSYLVANIA GLASS SAND 


CORPORATION 


First Mortgage 3!4% Sinking Fund 
Bonds, Maturing June 1, 1960 
Notice te hereby given that pursuant to the pro- 
visions of the First Mortgage of the Pennsylvania 
Glas Sand Corporation, dated june 1, 1940 
the following bonds issued under and secure 
by said Mortgage, bearing the following distinc. 
tive numbers: . 
2937 


2942 
3100 


1408 
Mil 
1447 


for $1,000. each have been called tor redemption 
through the exercise of the options! provisions of 
the Sinking Fund, and will be due and payable 
June 1, 1946 at 102% of the principal emount 
thereof end accrued interest at any of the follow. 
ing offices of Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. | 
1931 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, Pa. | 
69 Wall Sereet, New York City, N 
'0 Post ce Square, Boston, 
After said date, all incerest on said bonds will 
cease to ecctue. | 
NOTICE — Boad number 1645 called December | 
1. 1945 hae not as yet been presented for payment, 


BROWN BROTHERS HARRIMAN & CO. 
Fiece!l Agene 
May 1, 1946 


{ se: 
Woiudn “ENTER 


1 te 
rtiment 


STAT y NEW YORK 
DEPA 


DO HEREBY 


nd oe seal of the “Department | 
; Ibany, ~ 
fat tab Alloa Wiusandai 
PmOMaAn J. CURRAN, 
: Edward D. 7 © aga 
Deputy Secretary of State. 
STATE NEW YORK, DEPARTMENT OF| 
1 DO HEREBY CER that a certificate 
of dissolution of DIAM Mutts PAPER 
COMPANY, INCORPORA has been filed 
In is departm this 


Fie ces 


such corpor 
hundred and 


dissolved. 
thea, 
(SEAL) é - =. rst 


wnared 


ge 
| 


iv 
nn esHE; 


needs 


i 
~ 


ind, “GyRACOME D, NY Bealed Dia 


i Bier iose and then cogna. ter 
labor. 


pay. be, cma 
crate ara 


8 


FINANCIAL 


88,000 Shares 


, 


Common Stock 


18 Broad Street 
New York 5, N. Y. 


ee 2S SOAS SEES ESHEEEERUOEEE SE on ORO R. SESE 


We are pleased to announce that 


CUMMINS CATHERWOOD 


has been admitted to our Firm asa 
Limited Partner 


JENKS, KIRKLAND & Co. 


Members New York and Philadephia Stock FE rchanges 


1421 CHESTNUT STREET, PHILADELPHIA 2 
Rittenhouse 1300 


rr 008*s8ia6s 6G21 dee... 


We are pleased to announce that 


MR. SAMUEL GRONICK 


has been admitted 


as a general partner 


GILBERT J. POSTLEY & Co. 


29 BROADWAY, NEW YORK 6, N. Y¥. 


UNION ELECTRIC COMPANY 
OF MISSOURI 


Public Invitation for Proposals with Respect to .he 
Exchange and Purchase of Preferred Stock 


Union Electric Company of Missouri hereby invites proposals for 
services in obtaining exchanges of shares of its presently outstand- 
ing $5 Prefered Stock, of which 130,000 shares are now outstand- 
ing, for shares of its Preferred Stock, $ Series, without par 
no oh (herein referred to as the “New Preferred Stock”), of which 
130,000 shares will be offered in such exchange, and for the pur- 
chase of such of the 130,000 shares of New Preferred Stock as are 
not required to effect exchanges. Proposals will be received by the 
Company at Room 1901, No. 60 Broadway, New York 4, New Yerk, 

‘up to 12 noon, New York time, on May 8, 1946, or on such later 
date as may be fixed by the Company as provided in the Statement 
referred to below. Copies of a Prospectus relating to the New Pre- 
ferred Stock, of a Statement, dated May 1, 1946, of Terms and 
Conditions relating to Proposals with respect to the Exchange and 
Purchase of Preferred Stock and of other relevant documents re- 
ferred to in said Statement may be examined, and copies of certain 
such documents may be obtained, at the above address and at the 
office of the Company, No. 315 North Twelfth Boulevard, St. Louis 
1, Missouri, Proposals will be considered only from bidders whe 
have received copies of such Prospectus and only if made in accord- 
ance with and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in such 
Statements, including the filing of questionnaires by May 6, 1946, 

Officers and representatives of he Company, counsel for the 
Company and for the successful bidders, and representatives of the 
auditors for the Company will be available at Room 2007, No. 60 
Broadway, New York 4, New York, on Monday, May 6, 1946, at 
3 P M., New York time, to meet with prospective bidders for the 
purpose of reviewing with them the information with respect to the 
Company and its subsidiaries contained in the Registration State- 
ment and Prospectus and the Company's invitation for proposal, 
All prospective bidders are invited to be present at such meeting. 


UNION ELECTRIC COMPANY OF MISSOURI 
By J. W. McArez, President 
Dated, May 1, 1946. 


NOTICE OF REDEMPTION 


of 


AMERICAN BEMBERG CORPORATIO?: 


261 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 16, N. Y. 


700 Shares of 7% Preferred Stock 


NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that, pursuant to the provisions of « 
Section 4 of its certificate of incorporation, American Bemberg Corpora-"* 
i a Delaware corporation, has elected to redeem and will redeeme. 
on jul 1, 1946, 700 shares of its 7% Preferred Stock of the par value. 
of $100 per share, being the shares drawn by lot and represented by the. 
certificates bearing the following numbers a 


Certificates with prefix P 
1973 2302 2553 2752 28623 314 
2063 2397 25612755 2863 3026 3038 3191 
2087 2426 2601 2773 2976 3027 3043 3205 
816 1258 1474 1882 2192 2433 2665 2816 3013 3028 3127 3212 


*8 shares out of Cif. Ne. F-44558 for 100 shares 
912 shares out of Cif. Ne. P-4670 for 50 shares 


oma 


3035. 3148 3268 
3450 
3464 


5496 


4145 
4358° 
4363 
#4413 


4553 


752 906 1389 1527 
46700 


738 969 1438 1614 
7@1 1067 1459 1783 


mm 


Accordingly, the Corporation will pay on and after July 1, 1946 on 
the shares of such stock represented by the certificates listed above at 
the office of Bank of the Manhattan Company, 40 Wall Street, New 
York 15, N. Y., the redemption price per share of $110 and accrued divi- 
dends to the date of redemption. 

From and after July 1, 1946 dividends shall cease to accrue on the, 
shares hereby called for redemption, and all rights with respect to-. 
such shares so called for redemption shall forthwith after such redemp-_- 
tion date cease. and determine, except only the right of the holders tox« 
receive the redemption price therefor, but without interest. 

By order of the Board of Directors 


AMERICAN BEMBERG CORPORATION 


By H. W. Spauvcoevm 
Secretary and Treasurer 


May 1, 1946. 


‘Central Bag & Burlap 
——COMPAN Y—— 
Chicago, Iilinois 


Dividend Notice 


Tne pet ee 6 me 
red a quartert 
share on the Common 


CRANE CO. 


pases meee 
meseinl ge * 


M. F. POTTER, Secretary. 5 


— | 


SOUTH AMERICAN GOLD 
& PLATINUM COMPANY 


61 Broadway, New York 6, WN. Y. | 
April 15, 1946. 

A dividend of tea (10c) — 

share has been declaréd oc 
mon stock of the company, 
May 23, 1946, to stockholders 
ie Aes Geaianaran May 8, 
SAM A. LEWISOHN, President. 


THE VULCAN DETINNING COMPANY 
Dividend . 
slant i Rh, day declare@” 
@ 10) vidends 
pe lat the close a on the record 
Com | On ED STOCR: 1%% 
ayable| isd Mol tuib SoMMONgfoCk i 5 pa 
recotd | share payable June 2, lock. to storkhotdeaps 
946, of Tecord June 10, 1946 : 
| OBERT 5. LER, Beeretery \ 
| Sewaren, N. J.. April 34, 1946. 


to stockholders 


7 





42 . FINANCIAL THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY Il, 1946. CURB QUOTATIONS 


= CITIES SERVICE UNIT] .q@ctms. 1» conronare saurrs.or xaanes | FEDERAL, DEPOSITS [zt nass Si LIAISON MAN NAMED ots ay Sante a 


City and $28,000,000 at all report- Bank for Reconstruction and De-\of deposits for the account of the 
y 


Ft ei | 
T0 ( ALL BIG ISSUE ay na | DROP $301 000 eS wia7, ‘ BY RESERVE BAN velopment, it was announced yes |international bodies. Deposits and 
: Se : mg j j terday. * |transactiona are believed to have 
“i ie ‘ = — mR Mr. Overby, whose appointment) been small, but are expected to 
; ' Fe ee es ,000, ew tor é is effective today, will act as a w eventually to v 

“pieaztiae0 of te 3/41, | nn . iy thioci im ne “Chagn/A.N. Overby, an Asiatant Violante aiwcn te anti a Ra Bal 

:211,400 of Its 312% . fs a Decrease of $32,000,000 jn istrict’ $32,000,000 in the San| President, to Be Tie With j|and the international organisa- a A, 
Debentures at Eady Date in New York City Francisco district, and $341,000,000 International Groups The appointment of Mr. Overby 
ty ; at all reporting member banks. Woods agreements, and also a8 4M was initiated by the Federal Re- 
Deposits of the United States Gov- operating executive of the Federal|serve System, and was not re- 
At the annual meeting of stock- Special to Tax New Youu Times. ernment and of domestic banks de- ; Reserve in handling deposits, dis-|quested by the Fund or the Bank, 
holders of the Cities Service Com- WASHINGTON, April 30 — The/clined in all districts, The Federal Reserve Bank of bursals, foreign exchange transac-|It was regarded as @ recognition 
condition statement of weekly re- 1 RS New York has appointed Andrew|tiong and similar operations for the /of the growing demands which the 


pany yesterday in Dover, Del., W. . an 
Alton Jones, president, announced porting member banks in 101 lead-|20TH-FOX PLANS PENSIONS|N. Overby an assistant vice presi-| accounts of the two institutions. (institutions would make aa facili« 
; ing cities, the Federal Reserve Se Reg tes dent, in charge of operations in' The Federal Reserve Bank here ties in this money market. 


cc oan ented medi 7 peered reported today, shows thel/nirssters of Film Concern Vote 


Company, a subsidiary, would call fs e. a following principal changes for the : 
tor redemption on May 31 ail of eb ss aren Condition of Reserve Member Banks in 101 Cities April 24 


its 3% per cent debentures due in! v% 
1962, which are outstanding in the PA oa (Figures im millions of dollare; six ciphers omitted.) 
amount of $18,211,400. rie s Phila Rich on 
With the Cities Service call of ae so. / ASSETS 7 ‘ : ee Avante si'fce 
~ ohana mbes per ees I i rs #48.340 Braet ae ore 1,133 412 + — 
ntures, due , for payment on Benjamin H. Namm y .|Com'l, industr’l, cultural loans 17,468 497 3,120 260 447 183 
Jan 1, ten to cl of #80 Fe et nn one ian to pn | “aa eamee aoe ge 
000 bring the total debt and pre- curu ms cocks ON, A aw nm BAY —f “A 
“ - Stockholders of A. I. Namm & At the meeting of U. 8. Government obligations.... 1,388 1,070 - 


in New York City, $17,000,000 in|ment Federal Social Security ben- 
ferred stock reductions si 1930 directors of ’ i 
. 4 pagpelensss = Son, at a meeting held yesterday,|A. I. Namm & Son, Benjamin H,|the Chicago district and $41,000,-lefits, subject to approval by the|otner loans for purchasing or car- 


to $242,742,000. The consolidated 000 at all reporting member bank 
approved a segregation of the real)Namm, formerly president, was 8 mg member *.|Commissioner of Internal Revenue rying: 
annual interest charge will thuslestate and the operati : and increased $20,000,000 in the U. 8. Government obligations.... 
perating assets of|/elected chairman of the board = San Brancieco district. The plan will be effective as of Einar eonuntties 


have been reduced from $29,853,000/the corporation. The operating as-|Leonard 8. Ross. vice*president an °! Jan. 1, 1946. 
in 1931 to less than $14,000,000, | sets were sold to Namms, Inc., for|general manager, was made presi- pn = ase ie suoaeees Employes of National Theatres peel extene Saas 


Mr. J told stovckhold ¢| the entire outstanding stock of this|dent and treasurer. ar A. ill not participate in| Other loan 

, rik OTS @’|new corporation. The latter will Baum, formerly pw: liege the|ment obligations declined $26,000,- ea sey ge oneal thelr own| Treasury billa 

oe oo ay ee ee operate the department store at|board of A, I. Namm & Son, in|90®, and other loans for the same oe oatthiieead in 1942, he said,| Treas. certificates of indebtedness 
rte in new construction,/452 Fulton Street, Brooklyn, and|addition to becoming vice presi-/PUTPOse $24,000,000. Loans to bro-|7.. sntire cost of the new plan oes Any BAN 


refining and natural gas facilities! ijease the premises from the Arebec| dent ' ers and dealers for purchasing or ; 
P ent of Namm's, Inc., assumes the carrying other securities increased|“' be borne by the corporation, |Opligat'ns fully guar. by U.8.Gov. 


as s00n as manpewer and ma-/Corporation, a successor to| office of president of the Arebec the estimated annual contribution) Other securities 
terials are available. The operating! A. 1. Namm & Son. Corporation. een of ry bille de-|PY the company to be about 10 per Reserve — Fed. Reserve Banks 
oubeldianjes of Empire have their! clined $70,000,000 in the New York — of mp dey By em = Balances with domestic banks.... 
engineerin lans ready for pro-| a oa employes Other aasets—net 

‘? 4 improve.| FOR WORLD BANK BONDS | Navy pay ts good—and you have| “istrict, of which $38,000,000 wasting program. LIABILITIES. 
Se of eapeneen ene Gaprere a a chance te become a well paid Cutside of New York City, $51, y Demand deposite—adjusted 
ment in the amount of $43,-| nrg expert through Navy t Y 000,000 in the Chicago district, and ing Milling G 'g Board | Time deposits ........05.-: 
000,000. Cities Service of Dela-| '"vestment Bankers Discuss Seil-|°*P* y ing. You's114,000,000 at all reporting inem-| Joins Milling Group's U. %. Government deposits 
ware has plans for construction| ing With Federal Officials |°®" "© enlist im the Regular Navy|ber banks. Holdings of Treasury| Percy A. Brown, a director of| interbank deposits: 
for two, three, four or six years.|/Notes declined $27,000,000 in the/ithe Wilkes-Barre (Pa.), Deposit ee aay om ay 


in the Chicago area, estimated at 
$18,000,000. & WASHINGTON, April 30 “pB— Go to your nearest Navy Recruiting|Chicago district and at all report- and Savings Bank, was elected yes-| gorrowings 
Station. ing member banks. Holdings of terday a director of Flour Mille of | Other liabilities 


In the natural gas field, Mr.|The New York investment banking Ausonten. tna, Stn, town eine holes Capital account “<j * poose 
’ . “ ite to deman eposit acon 


Jones said, thé Cities Service Gas|nouse of Haligarten & Co, toda 
Company, a subsidiary, plans to : y . t with the Wilkes- terbank and U. 8. Govt. 
oe As offered its services in marketing) Principal Assets and Liabilities of Member Banks| i eis. fonts Association. seeee te during current week... 14,004 


construct a 26-inch natural gas 
pipeline from the Hugoton field to|?°"4 issues of the World Bank, 


See ote sora oe RE“ —~/TRANSACTIONS ON NEW YORK CURB EXCHANGE 


t 


130 $1, 


5 
et 
a 
& 


S 
a 


ey 
it 

2 

s.. sect 
8 eight 


: 
z 


243 
14 
160 


S2-—— » 
SEEZBuaSS 2 
EEce.anc 
z 
Su.was 
—8: Se 
28ac: Ez 


—-~ oe 3 
a 
a 
= 
oe bl 
Fh : & 
we 
oa 
=F 
wo 


wE BEE ubude: 82Gce: xx 


se wich: 3€Gea ses 1. 


2és 
S52 o523%. HER: 
SEN atsét 


~&8 £36 eskE. 


seeeeeee 


B SEE véckt. 825< 
Soiu8 S38 saecke: 358 


s 


a 
-2s we 
-— 
: 
wf 3 


SSBES BEE 828% 


~ 
8 Benxxvd F258 
‘ 
irs 
sce. 
te: 
i 


&s 


ments in Kansas City and through-| Officers of the firm told Gov- (In Dollars 
out the area. The pipeline wil! cost| ¢-nment representatives that they ASSETS ———Net 
in excess of $25,000,000. bell th aa Apr 17, 1948 
Silmmarizing operations of Cities|°*'*v® the so-called Bretton Woods onrepeetiperet = “33.000; 
Bervice companies last year, he %0nds—probably to be floated next we 


- #aid subsidiaries refined 17 per|fall—would get “a good reception” 
“cent more oil than in 1944; soldifrom American investors. They 


$358,000,000 of products and serv-|oonterred with officials of the 


ices, as against $331,000,000 in the 
previous year; sold 3,000,000,000/5tate and Treasury Departinents, /neat estate loans 


gallons of petroleum products, 15|the Federal Reserve, the Securities) ii." [°™ 
per cent more than the record year/and Exchange Commission and) i7sssury 
of 1944, and 265,000,000 cubic feet other agencies which have been Treasury 


of gas, 12 per cent above the rec- ted States bonds 
ord figure of 1944. concerned over the problem of Obligations fully guaranteed 


her ities OR 
More than 71 per cent of the | Setting a favorable public recep- Reserve with Federal Reserve Banks 
voting stock was represented at/tion for the bonds. a | 


Cash in vault 
Balances with 
the meeting in person and by! The discussion developed the 
proxy, and all offiters were re-|suggestion that bonds of ten or|fme +9 
elected. . &. i 
‘ fifteen-years maturity would be}interdank deposits 
best received, with interest rates * 
slightiy above prevailing rates on!Borr "8" demand’; 
Columbian Carbon United States Government issues. | pe OR 


peed Ls Gace, eeasiiant at are ee ———— S easetesnniemmnmai 
syesterday at the annuei meeting) § = QYVER-THE-COUNTER SECURITIES 
p think the company could complete|__T UESDAY, APRIL 30, 1946—Sources of these unofficial quotations given upon request. 


its $7,000,000 capital expenditures BANKS AND TRUST COMPAN IES 


this year owing to restrictions on 


materials. Based on first-quarter NEW YORK OUT-OF-TOWN Ani 06K Ate. 


results, sales are running at an ‘ 

nual rate of $32,000,000, - v Fish... 
an ate of § com ous.aseed' bee | PHILADELPHIA NEWARK m -, tye 
Atlas Ply 1...., 
27 Prod 40xét 


TUESDAY, APRIL 30, 1946 Stock and Dlv'd Sie. 
and Dir'é Sis. Le . | "'in Detiars. 200s. Fi 
100s. First. Wigh. Low. Last. Chge. Stocks. Domestic Bonds. Farvign Bonds, Total Bands. | Par _ oe 

450 000 $270 000 40,008 $519,000) Raym Conc Ie... 


, ‘ ee , 
ee eee ; 
i eats Fe | Raytheon Mig.... 19 
TYe+ Ma Monday eeeeee teen reeeee 440 008 170,000 08 200,000 | ano ed Ot 8 
| 
, 
+ 


i 
z 


2 882 220 82322832252222 22 2334 


tt 
£s 


+++ 
ad 
stg 
st 


s) 
a 
2% 
“4 
a 


+1 
a 
~ 


\s 

\* 

i 
= 
ay ae 


18%4— 000 * $1,320,000 5,620,000 34,940,000) RicaStx 0 Gds tee 
12% i Veer 00 GRO ccccesceweesee eee 65,270, 7 Pea! tee i 7 michtiold Oil war 4 
iM —— uae Richmond Ret, : 10% 
Wet | Stock and Div'd Sis. Wet [Rio Gr Vai G ¢ Mw 
ae ions First. High. Low. Last. Chge. | in Dollars. 100s. First. High. Low. Last. Chge. | Roeser & Pend On! 17% 
Grown C Pet tggt 4 8% He WiLAKE SM hao. 2 19 > 2 Ronson A tats 20 1 a 
\Crown Orug .0Set S 8%q «» |Lakey Fdy & M. 10% i%— tt 6 & 
Cub Atl Sugiiget 9 33% Va} Lamson Corp Yeg 1 13 b+ P et 8 1% 
[Cuban Tob .....280 26 — Tq) Lane-Welle 1.1 2 18% ia | potary EI Sti...t 12 
ones LangUn@akA 2.. 1 Jie Nel yan Aere ise? 1 
DEJAY STRSt\aet ; 18% 18% 18¥_ 18i%p— Ya|Lefcourt Realty. 1 10%y " 
DennisMig A.ddet 7 18% 18% 1 1e~ % 3s a 
* 23 
8 
19% 
8 
i 


Bue se 
3% 
g-etEee 

ez? 


& 
23 
Be 

#r 


: 
: 
: 


Z 


$3 ea"32353-3e 
#37 


sae 


= 
— 


$e" 
& 
7 


+iL titel 
BESBES 


$82 838 E555555832223 22 82 
tit 


_ 
hed 
= 
= 


Bowe: 
$ 


2 
5 
1 
1 
i 


~& 
ae 
iit 


+lLttlF+lel el eee ++ 


Thh 
° g3* 


+ 


a? 2 


ist LAWRENCE... 19 
\ St Lawe pf bi. .c188 
te St Regis Pap Pil 
{2 |Sait Dome Oi! 
42 | Samson Unit... 
? | Savoy Oi! 


? 


Derby Ol Vee..f 6 1 13 — Line Material .. 

‘Det Gray Ir... 2 oe Wp Lionel Corp ...F 2 
DeiMichSt 300 f 14% 15 % Wh Me Lit —, sases Be 
Det Sth Prod tf ee eM Oe et Mt icons Bin 20% 
iy |cioe Sn eee ot 2vp+' ity! LoneStarGes 90. 23 eI pieney, O.: 
tp | Divee Corp \e Long Is Lig .... \ y 


2 « 2% Mm “ OA 
| ag 2 a2 ong ts Lot. 180 114Ng 114g 114 114 — 124 /schulle (OA), 


Domest Ind A..t 25 6My 6M 
- Ly OS, 105%, 105 105 
~. Dero. x te is % % 7 es se tous Lae ae. 44 rt me 12% 12% .. pda tie 
‘ 18ig— Yq Lynch Corp .20et 2 My 2% .. Sefberinahun ye 
: ity) Selby Lt 
; 2 15 im’. * Selected Indus,.? 
? % ., |delect Ind cv \agtz 
1 18 18 + t% Set ind > 
5 17% 17% te Semler / 
. 3 20Vy 20%y .. | Sentinel Rad. 159 
5 ‘ Jala 44 | Sentry S Con 
rh m% Yq Shat-Dena 100 
7 
2 
20 
i 
7 
1 
2 
1 


e~ © \nyan Cone Pet 20 
Dennis M profdat 1180 180 189 188 =1 | 


2 
= 
s 


* 


1++ +l 
e¥ uF suse wscocy se 
822 822 2222 222222322 23 33 


332 223 8222 323228222 83 32 


ue 2 


e.§ 8 
‘we “se seer” 'f 


tse*-37serss**5 


 gpeten wstveesce 


t23s 
1 it 


see 
e237 
t7Fe 


= 


i++ +41 


3 
2 
: 


PY geah sted“ pe32 


55*253"53 
cxk 
Pet iteel fit 
ses  sovte se see te see's 


+i 
~ 
-_ 
= 
e 


_ OTHER COMPANY MEETINGS 


~—-—~ 


Bz3s°s°°SE2 27*Fe 
“te 


- —— 
-—-e 
svete 
awe 


SE 


&y 
BE2"s*"3S%s"33°~-3"- 355" 
% 


w~ 
a 


_|MANGEL STR if 
Gat S| Maron, 34. She. 


Fré 


: 


<8 
EsS*s5-32s3¥27°7° 
Es? 
*25° SE sis 


ee > 
33 

Evy 
33" 2523 


rr 


— 
-—— -ee 


+ 4 lien 
Ne Fe ete Oe Owe ee 


35 


oa 
-——- 


My Shaw WEP tye 
1% 


b ¢<t~ Sz 
ts 
wre 
=exscen 
oe 
os 
> 


Poe FFF 
© 


S33 “323322 Ez 


iichigen 
- ie ae 
33Va— 1%) Mich Sug pf .1 
4 + |Micromat 


53%... |MidSP A vicl.20e 
17%+ Valmia St P B we. 1 
MidWestCp Vee. 


3 
ee 


pared with $27,000,000 in 1945, he Dank of Man (1.20). 394 35% B9uIFelten (@ om 

said) No commensurate gain {M/giny of WY (14)..430 442 490 [Guaranty (1% Gent Penn National 36 Auto : 
‘ profits is likely, owing to higher! sankers: (1.0) . % 51% WlIrving (a60c) Exchange +s +g pene Aute V Mch tpg? 
woperating expenses, Mr. Carr deé-/|Bk of Yktn (158.80).104 114 104 [Kings Co ($80)... Dye Avery&S pt 1 
~~ clared. Broux County (1).. 88 06 88 |Lawyers (71.25) .... N 
¢ ‘ Brooklyn (75) ......138 143 137 4dManufacturers(2.40), 62% 64% parere e Bank....09 . BAB & WIL ‘ee. 

International Business Machines [cent Hanover (4)...114 118 11¢4)|Merchants (12.40)...62 7 62 |g 

Thomas J. Watson, president nee & ae OS OS py cere nt Pagprk - eo 0 
International Business Machines |city (1 a. ’ on on oe York (4) aa 
Corporation, said at the annual /Clinton (a2) .....34 35 34 |Penn Exch (80c).... “ ay mut.. 339% 

ttgerese 161 
ty’ “Hy 


meeting of stockholders here yes-|Commercial (1.60).. 47% 50% 4Ty4/Public (1.65) Coon 

terday that sales for the first|Cor nents Soi HD Bo siNitle Creasunion’. vas esss de ’ 

quarter were 146 per cent above/|Empire (3) ........120 125 120 |Trade - te Me $e DETROIT 
Federation (1) ..... 27 30 27 |Underwriters (4) ... Nat Bank of Detroit 47% “4% @ 

the 1945 period and that a sub-/piduciery (1.90) |") 41% 44% 414%/U & Trust ($35)... Roy 45 , 

“stantial backlog of orders was on Fifth Avenue ($24) 970 1010 970 tinciuties extras. 408 SAN: FRANCISCO 

hand. Sales costs $2,374,781 First Nat! ($80)... 1860 1920 1870 clared in 1046 Northern Trust ....| Bank Amer NTS... 48% 50% a eg 

during the quarter because of an| WN. Y. CITY BONDS INSURANCE sTOcKs 


increase in number of salesmen Bid Asked Bid ndustrial—vUtil! 
from 815 to 1,707, he said. ae oe aes ee & 2 OO we Bid. Asked wer sh Swraid we wat 
Reports from IBM branches 1m |i, juiy, iset......... 341% 149%lAetna Life (11.80) am ae*¢ Ul rime tne (a8Ge). ....... Lis 19a | Slumenthal Le 
mine liberated European countries jis, June, 1965......,.,.140% 142% | Agricultural (19%) .. pontega ‘ ifeie amy Ce Auab) £2.50 
revealed that they were able to/%, March, 1965..,,,,,.196% 138%/Am Allie (2) . «coves hee a (1 60 United Arts ‘ihea (bide). 


retain about $2,070,000 in cash in |i. May, ies a py hea 
. . m Casualty ) 
_Bddition to other Ss Were jug March, 1981 Am Equitable (1) ; Brewst - 
pusing the funds to rehabilitate the aus, nov, 18, 1978.......166% 148%/am Insurance (170¢).... 20% , Brille Mfg if... 
‘company’s foreign business. 4's, Jam., 9TT........,.144% 100%/Am Reinsurance (1) .... pons Rome * ve Orit, Colen 6 
kehire (1.50), ; BritColPA hi z 


John G. Phillips, secretary, treas-|*'*. Fed. 15, 1976.......149% 145K)am Ki ; [Wash Ry&@kl 
’ pt wn(a2? ) 
urer and a director, was. elected sg — yp ++. 147% 1440%lAm Surety (3%) TS AA . \Wurliteer UR) Ge (aaer. 
» Apr , ast iw a ’ ?Includes extras 


*to the executive and finance com-| qi.’ april, i966 
~mittee. A quarterly cash dividend jis, maren, 
-of $1.50 a share was declared. 44s, March, gar to 255, Columbia (a) INVESTING 


Nashua Manufacturing eg Consol Grocers ( Fixed or Unit 

P Oct., 1060... cceceee 142% 140K ease id Berry Biscuit 
Conn Gen Life (71.50)... 7 Collier (new).... Assoc Std Oll Shares.... 

Stockholders of the Nashua t Butler (PH) ie 


nee ‘s “ : Suey, ipee. cesses tom Tete Comt Casualty (1.00)..... : in wified Tryst Do: 
anufacturin ompany, who me Nov., Federal (11.56) 7 “° * 
“at Nashua, N. H., yesterday to a mee ne 1 a y “peonnes ey M4 > [MALL LAMP 489 
consider sale of the company’s as- 
beets, adjourned to May 14 without 

{itaking action. The decision was 
j taken after J. Linzee Weld of Bos- 
ston, president of Textron Mills, 
tInc., owner or in control of 95 per 

scent of Nashua’s common shares, |,,’ Hanover Fire (1.20) 

; advised that Textron was examin- |ss, » 120% 1814 |Hartions ote it bs oe tam 
wing offers for the property care-|7%. 2) 7 

i @ully in the light of insuring future momentos: 

“pperations of Nashua. 

‘ Concurrently with the sale of] N. Y. STATE BONDS 

; Mashua assets, Textron plans to | 145, 

*make an irrevocable offer untti/1%s, 

+ July 15 to purchase at $100 a sharp |! 

‘any Nashua common stock, in-|}* 


; cluding that now on option to Tex-|iq,, 


Perit ith 


F~z23"*45 


% Electrographic 1 

Ve Eriiott Co 1... 

>». |Equity iis 
EquityCp i 
Esquire inc 35? 
jane CAM t 


¢ 
Fairch E&A .20gt 
Faircne&A pf 2¥2! 
“Doet 


E 


10 
ny 22% 


; ee Se 


g 
ent ™ Kerr 


35-3°* 
353° 


“weer oe 
-_ 


=. 
_ 
$3}5f2 


f= 
SF 


ae 
+ haha 


= 
a 
= 


f 


Mining Can 10 
| io 1¥6| MissouriPS .60gtz150 


P 


3 F**Z~pe3*ss 


=33 
$ 
Fs 


S35 s328 33°53 


8 -—wee 
#97 s3532 
tit. 
NENCES 


- 

- 
~ 
- 


|Fou (P) Brew lat 
so..t 


Fuller (GA) 1Vget 


= 
ere 
fi 
Le 2 
32 


Hy 
lg 
Ese 
“3s 


~egobusy 
et ES 
itt 


- 
+ 
tt 


1+ 
set 
10g 


++ |Stané Twbe®. 159? 
V4 | Starrett Corp...t 
+ |Stein (A)&Col 608 
45 = Val Sterchi BrSirs ta 


; 
a 


z 
~ 
F 





“8 
35S 859-2°5 32°35 597923523 * 


_ 
- 


3 
= 
+) 
23552 
3S* 
So< 
. 
BeFE*s 
zea 
>+\i+ 


wBsz 
Sc 
— BK eee eK Oren enw ~e 


if 


2 
o 
¢ 
< 
a 


177 


acl 


fff 
(i 
: ¥2:% 
& 


'‘ S#eee sees 
< 
© 

et 


|Stinmes (HM) 
Strook & Co itrSe 
**» |ounbeam Cp 1.40 1 
tStay _t| S00, Port Com tenes 
a+ pa, |Swan-Finch O ag I 


‘a vamPa EL 1.40. 3 

Technicolor Yq 5 

Texon OGL 407 § 

**), | Textron Inc Yget 94 

4\ Tile Roof 20...1 | 

204%4-~ 134) Tob Sec LidD.O4e 1 

m 4% Toledo Ed O%pteate | 
Tenepah Min 

103¥%a— YS Trans-Lux 0e..f 2 

|Tranewest Oil lat 6 


"322° 
35°F 


— 
PV. g.rere¥ss 


rn 
#3 


E 


SP8E3- 353 s*3 553535359" * 
ys 
i 


SB were 
SeZ 
= 


ees 
eft F&F 
=*2- 


> 
: 
rs 
Sew 
2VseSs 
2F5*3*=5 


= jy | Glen Ald Coal 2. 

Gobet Inc ......? 
€ ‘ Godchaux Sug A 4 
Goldfield Con... 


se 


$223e3 
F 
22; 

32 
*535F 52° 
fe 
Res 


3 


333 

su8k 
3 

os 


5y 
SO 5Ser5e"F53E F3F*Sr¥E22 
3 
} 


70% 


= 
i 


+ 
e 
é 


1 
Bre 
= 
SF 
~ 
é 
'F 
; #, 
i + 
SO Fteeet Fewe Ceesee 


¥t—tcs Ne 
Ssesee* 53322 


- 
ra 


BS332322277 
t 


3 
ste 
eF 


+4 
Eps 
Bs 
cs 


e 
B°33*32 


i 


aekk 
: - 


= 
“39 


é 
ry 





=u& 
3*32*S25 


3: 


ff 
Fd 
rf 


Fee 
S 
+ 


f 
: 


$ 
223322°5 553 
“3*333 


“| UDVLITE C det 8 
Me Ulen Realiz t 4 
Vg | Unexcetied Mfg.. 6 
14 Unies G Car.... § 
~» |Unit 1 3 
Vy Unit Corp war... 39 
| Unit Elastic 2.2150 
Wy Unit Gas 400..7 
¥y| Unit Lt & Rys 1. 3S 
Vy Unit Milk Prodiez2S 
1ig| Un Shoe M 2¥pa.2650 
35| Unit Sh M of eae 
> 

US Graphite .15e?250 
US & Int Sec. 13 

us = S pf Maktri50 


z 
=i 
i 
2 


fie 
aaae 
tv 
? 
#55 


:-€ 


z 
a 


~*35 
~835 
~> - 
$33 


=o 
rt 


é 
= > 
zzzz 
z 
he 
$35 
=... 
ie 
st. 


33 


3333 Meee 
- 
833 


?: 
3 


Fe 

uF 

dh 
yA 


18 
jHecla Min 1....7 6 
iM 14 —1 Meller (WE) 60at 2 
oo Hoe & A igtzSe 
1% 1% Me Holl C nae. 6 


Holophane Ve... 250 
Bt ee tS Hort (Henry) 405. 1 
200. 200 : Horme! & Co 2..250 


Z 

? 

! 
lle a a ae 2 


S seess see ¢ sz 


g 
i 


#5°5 


» 
uSEse 
"t = FE 


Ere 


333*5333 


Li a 
; 
Be *3333* 


>is 


v 
= 
? 
> 
= 
. 


#R"F2 fee 3 


F 
+’ 


ave 2 eee 


— 
-eouvVow 


Titi? 
“3° 728 


Ff 
3 


= 

: 
J 
eee 
#3 * 


” ny 
Fs 


fecie 


SoS¥.¥.U8 BBE 


= 


174 1 | MubbelCH) 1.60t 1 
tp/ Nemes Co ty le 
ag Mat 45 


ZE*SSussss 


285 


BETESSG3 Seea*ageeegeyg cpr 
; 
: 


110% ile : 
++, [United Stores .. 1 
M7? 117 + 34) Un Wall Pa. 1Sqt 22 
12%y 12%+ ValUniv Prod 400.250 
Utah-Idabe $ .1Se § 
~~ Utah P&L We 12 


“ 

% .. 

rT) [vALsPar cp. 3 11% 
Si¥g .._ |Venerwel Pet....? 11 108% 
ears Ml Vogt Mfg 60... 1 22\%q 


ivy WAGN'R Byic tee 27 4M 
3,\Waitt & 8d A.trS0 M% 

ey Waltham Wat .. 3 1 
Ward Bak war? 4 6% 
6924 


vv 
ve 
“o- 
+4 

= 
“= 


ist 
i 
5 
cas 


55 


2 
— 


= 
+ 
Eo 
2 
Eo"3on3*g*33*E* 
zhi 


es" 


957539 
: 
eerrs 


#29 


“4 
12 


29 
TE SEF? 


a5 Fy 
3 
:€ ,> 
+7 =F e~ 
s3__8s3. ubse 
$F2*3253* 3 


ee 
e 

f 

% 

é 

; 

: 
33 


sEes: ees 
2 
— 


a 


& bat | 


e 
sez 
a = 
- S8¢ce: rguessesex_xeie 


; 
Bde 
i 

A 

3 

= 

: 
$3 


27 


e 
FF 


vv 


SBssress 3 ceseesecseesysF4coe 


= 
eeccce 


B2233* 
2 


esStexrcces 6: 


Ford Hotels 


BUFFALAO, N. Y., April 30 UP— 142 |Pacific Fire (5) ........ 
Sale of the Ford hotels in Buffalo|(3* — eae maguentty (13.60) 
and Erie, Pa., to a group of Roch- | 59. , ; 190% 139% ad ew} ba conve 
ester investors for $2,000,000 was 5, dah bi 
approved today at the annual we J & P, 36-58 reg... .1% 
ing of stockholders of the For 
Hotels Company, Inc. The direc- Utility Bends 
tors, meeting later, elected W. Sau- 
rin Brooke of Montreal to the new 
position of executive vice presi- 
dent. Mr. Brooke has been finan- 


cial adviser. 


~ 


Ee 
a 
#*3323 
# * 

7 
2 
53 33 


Ms, 
. 
Vow, 
Yes, 
ts, 


3 
SPUSS--SlaasSSS o 


333 


3 

22 
“33 
Lit 


g83 Ba y5erxt_s ots cE 5rede Fugees 


up 
yeeet 
2?z* 
ti 
eeece  £ 
i? 


ffee 


3*3? 


Zs 
“2"s35 
"33° 


i] 

3 

Ig 
23 °2$,**3*2 


~~ 
— 


$ 
s 


52* 
freee 
5s. 


: 


—— 


S*y33"353 


B3=85r52 
ze 


a 
os 


Steme Eve EESEHe8bcBeises 
S3arn She BcRRexsessezeses 


Sets) 


is 
West VaCAC Veet S 15% 15%) 15% 
W'morel’d Inc laz2$ 22%y my) 2 
Yel Whitman (Wiig S$ at at 
«- [Wichita R OW.. 123 23 
Xp |Will’ms(RC) Jef 3 30%y 30% 
Ye Willson P 120012280 25 2S OS 
Winnipeg Elec.... 7 12% U 
Woodall Inn OOF 313 UD 
4 
im 


1 
| Woodley Pet 40? 3 4 
Wright-Marg 8.2028 4 
%| *In bankruptcy or receivership or being reorger- 
ized under Bankruptcy Act, or securities assumed 
ist such companies. fFully listed. Dividends ia 


Nte £5 
& 


B3°23.*32*2"2 
$3 
Pr tr 


i 


22 

5 

e 
is 


Bes 
.. 
2°.3* 
A oP 
& Pe 
Hi 

g 

- 


. 
a 
#8 « 


ase 
zzz 


3232 
ii 


> 
S45. 
3S. 

3 


Lint 


La 
ry] 


pocelbesibes 


S-24' 
“—-. 
na 
tF 


SISSES2S 0! 
seSegesecens 
= 


z 
® 3532$-F2* 


a 
ae 
a 
— 
-_ 
sf 

I 
oe 


2y 
“3-9 
“38 
Be 
~ a8: 


= 


i 
a 
" fi 

3 
eegretes 


i 
at 
i 


apm wd 
‘Ti 
FT 


se 
5 
—" 


i 2 
“= 
Pu®owun 


SO\q 
10 110 ~—(«. 
110% 110 110 = 


a 
2 
7 
ng 
Rg 
= 
Fe 
7 


$5225 8 s¥gse 
ik 

oi 

a 

3 


Jersey G & E Sa, S3, 121 ee 
Thermold 40...107% .. leinred in i008. bPald in 
TRENTON, N. J., April 30 “P— Guaranteed Stocks Canadian Bonde 
W. D. Pardoe, vice president of the| alabama @ Vicks (6) ...1m 
Thermoid Company, reported 
=the annual meeting today that the . 
Los Angeles plant and equipment/c CC & St. L pf (5). ..1 
has been sold at a price above its| evens i Zits (3-20) .108 
book value and that a twenty-/port w a Jack pf (5.50) .104 
geven-acre factory site has been/m! Cent Leneet lines os 
urchased in Utah as a major pro-/Northern Central (4)..... 
Reston center of automotive fric- 4 on 4 of en ies 
tion materials and industrial rub-| yay w 


ber products, 5) 


Hew! bber roveray. ++ fea ts Ue ‘ Oi 33 div. AS ELEC 4¥gs 5B..... 1 
ee oe 1 ” AS T&T o's Metse 


g 
€ 
sf 


eae ww 


; 
: 


M 
e 
SEe3* 
33 
+ 


Fee 


= 

a 

~ 

38 
« 
F 
~y 


ct 

é 
if 
7 


Yq! the foregoing table are actual disbursements besed 
S,/on last quarterly or semi-annual declaration. Un- 
: | tess otherwise noted, special or extra dividends are 
2 18%) 1 Yq} not included. xd Ex dividend. xr Ex rights. @ Also 
i 110% 11014 110%g+ yl extra or extras. b Plus stock dividend. «Cash or 
16 = 15% 16 «» | ttock. @ Dvclared or paid so far this year. f Pay- 
105 105 105 able in stock. Paid last year. bh Payable ie 

** [Canadian funds. Accumulated dividends paid or 
12m 11% 11%— Yi declared this year. ur Under rule. ww With war- 
5 5 3 — Yyirants . cw Without warrants. 2 Actual sales. 


t 


: 
: 
E 
7 
33 
38 
a 


"esis" 
3233 


ijt 

Sead 

“$E*s 
3 Ed 
3osae 


e 


8 
“2 


BIcoSvUR-A- sus 


ttititi 
27 


— 
eee 


gee 
TY, 


See  s seeescce 


: 
3 
#2 


REE ES BE 
é 


i 


Smo nce 
Ee 
5 

8-25533 
if 


3) 
- 
4 
gs 
~~~ 


iz 
3s: BE: ae 
woe 2 ue <a 
i? 


i 
wt & 


a 
.20t 
soouel 
Kirklk GM h.04. 
Klein (DE) 1b.. 


He 
iy 
; 

ee" 
32 
B32? 
32 


Scsrecness see Ske 


23% 
s 
2 


sesgeneses Fr 
2 
2 
= 


5 
S2z5e2~ 
= 
= 


32~ 
~S-8- 
=52~ 


33 
"3 


- 


SESEESsaRec Ec ¥ 
seseezrss 


& |s3- 
FF 


i 
77 


Sales in het 
$1,000 High. Low. Last. Chom, 


UNIT EL NJ 4 @... 41 1 = 
Met |Utah POL & MIZA BI het ele te 
= . 000 High. Low. Last. . 
vt tae WALDORF-AST Sc Ht 3 & Z 4 +* 
mm +1 


we 10014 1 oe a 
esis 100% 106%4— eee ANN a ih — 14 | Wert Newsp Un Os 99... 3108 


BUFFALO, N. Y., April 30 (> 

—Stockholders of the Hewitt Rub- CRATE ROAD EQUIPMENT BONDS BELL ae £ 8. sim 
sink wee} 1 “< 

1 102% pre 10a" Ye FOREIGN BONDS 


ber Corporation approved today @| The subjoined quotations calculated om « pome, a 
ion’ fer all AP & 
change of the corporation's name a basis are average prices R lel & Pac 54..* 9 1054) 10414 105¥y+ be 
i FIN RES MG BKS6IST 5 
to Hewitt-Robins, Inc. —— 1318 104 lotie + cael seminomas we Wy, 80% Bet 3% 
t = Ohio Pub -«» 1105S 105 105 + Ya/ RUSSIAN Gigs 1919.83 10 10 0 + %& 


OTe 107%. s 
o seete teeve— ? JER CEN PEL 3¥5 6ST 5 104% 104% 104% + Ye par per 5, 55 2 103% 103% 103%. [Russ S¥qs 1901.......8 1 2 1  . 
jane | [Pen Cen L&P 4tgs 77. 1105 105 105 | § Matured bonds; negotiability impaired by mat 
da” an, eee ‘4 MIDLAND VAL 4s Gist 2:74 7S) 78 — 2% Puy Sy NJ > ba 2172 172 172 + %/rity. * In bankruptcy or receivership or being 
@...¢ 3107 107% 107%. organized under Bankruptey Act, or ies 
1é.t 2105 105 105 ~— 3% NESR PW Ge A 200d., Jill Mf Ml = 8 S$ 105% 105%y 105%g— % sumed by such companies. ft Bonds s 
; |M Eng GO 3101% 101 101 8 .. |Se Cal easeoct Q10TV 107 107 — SgMully fisted. ur Under rule. ww With 
J4593A.. 10 TE Hy TS + HN Eng GEE Ss 100% 100% Ya 'Se Cal coe 3106V 106Y) 106%g— Yq ow Without warrants. war Warrants. 


rE 


#33 
[ 
com = | 
aE iF 
i 


i 
; 
ik 
cf 


Bacbsees uses 


~ 
z 
24 


; 
; 
E 
i 


sucbebbasct 
gE 


oe 


ftfttts 


“Robins Jr., president, 

“company's plants@here would be/A‘) 4 
«known as the Hewitt Rubber divi-| Bessemer ‘ 
sion and those at Passaic, N. J.,\cent rR ye 7 
as the Robins Conveyors division.) Chesapeake 

The latter concern is owned by|Gni a North 
®the corporation. oe 


« 


bebabuesy: 


geoce 
titi iid 


& 
& 


usssesssarsessi 
o 
m 


G8susasssesess 


mores 
Bsa 


\chauhauhauh am ae anh ahh aol ah ah ah ah 


ee 
et pe 


basecaehsan 
o 
- 
. 


, 





COMMODITIES THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. FINANCIAL—BUSINESS L+ 


SECURITY OFFERS | COMMODITY PRICES [(QTTON PRICES OFF |RYB MOVES HIGHER | | ARRIVAL OF BUYERS aTICE ov BADEMPTION 
PROPOSED 10 SEO "i" ) 1070 20 POINTS) AFTEREARLY DROP) aati ore aires as np iiee ng 


Corn, 2, yellow, bu 
Rye, 2, Allied Stores Corp., 1440 Bway Bishop, women’s, 


b 2. 
Oats, 2 bu 7 BOSTON—Jordan Marsh Co ; Mice r Robineen Wright, a % ¥. women's 
Standard Oil of New Jersey! Zour, No'wn, wn, 100 ibe: 378° leary Seiiing Attributed tolGain Is Permissible Limit of| Hs, mvC” Minn, hints wet, "him Se ae PENNSYLVANIA COMPANY 
and Others List Deben- Gocoa, Bahia. Ib on a4 Texas Rains, Uncertainty 5 Cents a Bushel—Other | Wc" hrs oa 'R. Milte “Gomestics.| Townsend. men's Fe Rishner, areaon a; 
‘arepertes: B. MacEs- J. Braunstein, 326 W. 24th Secured Notes, Series A 


a draperies: KE. M 


tures and Shares ‘ ; ontens About Control Grains Are Unchanged roy, religious articles: Miss C Baits sports: ANSQNIA. Conn.—Peoples Store, HM. Goteen, and 


‘4 Rone, intters Mins O> Seas | cLRhtalS ve.—wansm Brody, reaty-to- 
ih - _ Sas alle nak te Wiel ee ome tee T Y 
+ ae ‘*: ear 344% Secured Fund s 
Special to Tus Rew Yoox Tuies. Cotten fetures on the Mew Terk Queries to Van Maw tens Dane Mise A.B. Peterson, bouses; Mise J. = DAYTON—Donenteld's: Mise M_ Carson, better wenty-five a Sinking Notes, Series 


PHILADELPHIA, April 30—| Iron, 2, Philadelphia. tom. oe 3s = [Cotton Exchange were rather quiet] CHICAGO, April 30— May rye| Next) Mig B Redman. womens misses’) 0° oy toute Proay. repdy-to-weer 


I 
Registration statements covert Steel billets, Pitts., ton... .°20. ies. ITY Pa 
Soo of demure] Sitar yng Nan ge re 2 Pa Te beets Pee dal bien er alka Iadatre of Pena/vania Coupea? dated Seneca io Sr 
shares of preferred stock and 231,- ; — - sheimer Co; Miss , rust Company, Trustee, that said Pennsylv ompan 
Pp Aluminum, Ib. ..........00 : Monday. day but reversed its action and ee. ani 4 peg ~ DB pte A gsr Seer Een his oi tae can selean ond nae cde denn ae, 


| NOTICE 18 HEREBY GIVEN, p@rsuant to the provisions of the 
BALTIMORE—Stewart & Co.; Miss C. Mueller | all of the outstanding Secured Notes, Series A, maturing subsequent te 


Indeature of Pennsylvania Company dated June 1, 1944, to Girard 


Liebdes 
15 
867 shares of common stock were electro. *.12 Starting 2 to 5 points down, the|closed with a net gain of 5 cents a|' 4 ~to- wear. 
Sitted lower with small|bushel, the permissible limit. Ag-|54 ‘s; Mra, G. Harkins! hosiery, knit underwear 
BOSTON Chandler : R. Fitsger 
im. 


it 


June 1, 1946, in the aggregate principal amount of $12,000,000., and 
all of the Twenty-five Year 344% Secured Sinking Fund Notes, 
Series B, maturing June 1, 1969, in the aggregate principe! amount of 


filed today with the Securities and . Ib. oie |market 
———— Commission by six cor- : beh: rallies from time to time. There|gressive short covering following | sea Marché; C. Rhea, men’s cloth-| POSTOR Bae’ . 
gg ey 6d clients York, Ib was a fair amount of selling cred- ae absorption W&8|sVticuse—pey Bros. & Co; D. Moward finer vi GO. Mecsuiag, Sure; ©. Frente 
‘52 ited with Memphis brokers, while n influence. tabrics. ) ’ terest, together 
New Jersey registered $85,000,000 the trade absorbed cotton’ re-| In Minneapolis May rye lost 5|muocuantncr'sr ise, inet, ruiman| mite fs eter aba wtih tas seipective geuchums applicable to the covers! mamatiien of Ge 
In 1871, to be undororition bene] Soessel ek shit: a. tam |tectantly en the scale down. Hariyjcenta early and finished with a net] Slt ats. treed Sere. > aan |CRSE RE 7. B. tor ¢ Becured Noten Series A, and the Twenty-ve Year 234% Secured 
, un a) Prin | 34", ye selling was attributed to favorable|£#in of 3% cents. In Winnipeg it ‘sults, dresess. sportewears "| hee * | ' ressed in terms of 
group headed by Morgen Staaley/MISCHAANDOUS = seine in Teena and the cantantea|was up 1% to & cents, the latter COLUMBUS Madison's Ine." Mise {Shapiro minses’ women's better dieses Me we Court: pore le ns pdb “EY si sick 
‘0. @ proceeds wou used) Hides, packers, t, Ib... ° uncertaint gardin .jon May. —Peekeine "Pecste Co i ee wt 

to retire a similar amount of 3) yr Midoont’ . ee 003 trol. he © Pree cen Active deliveries of cate rose 4, Seti nialibe trees soreeering A. Mated.| DALLAS. Marte & Co; ee. V. Series A, maturing June 1, 1947, 
r cent debentures due in 1961. i: to % cent. May and July oats,| ‘costs lls dresses, men's. wear reiieeren.| Phandagen. fing A’ MacBole™ Fania dune 1, 0068, 
ich e ° ve. on r 


vity, barre] “1, Four May notices were iss i 
Spey 4 1“ 4 > Saas oe new-crop deliveries of rye and Bieeekan st Mise &. Kaltendech, wash frocks, lingerie, 


@ public offering price of the! ' tme|the local market 
debentures would be filed by/ tice of Price Kdministralion’” m Romina! Orleans. Certificated at ue “Ot whest, corn and barley were UN-| drome, men's wees ee te Phgaement onde mr 
amendment. April 26 was 18,532 bales, com-/°Danged at ceiling prices. Summers, & os coats, saith om T. B/Pilise C. Lethin, millinery bis D. Counsel: 
Pre dresses 


coessories, 
miums on c rye at Minne- NORFOLK udy N . Mrs. &. Newberg, ; , ‘ G Lats 24 
Treen 


Miles Shoes, Inc., New York,| hern red with 18,137 bales on April 25 ‘ 
registered 23,444 shares of $106 5°Ut pene yinigeaip es =P agent PeYesterday's market statistics apolis declined 2 cents relative to) niGimonD. in M. Halperin, foe N. 'Plepenbrink. shoes base- 
sport ment, Miss A. Dunlap, patente’, pris’ wear 
infants’, eh 


| 
|pany, Los Angeles, a subsidiary of z . The -market ts, suits, dresses. . 
par value cumulative preferred follow: quckations fee the arb mt ome SHARON, Po:-Ben Jatie, coats, suits, dresces,| ping" Morkoetven “nest, ndren's 


stock and 56,267 shares of $1 par the American States Utilities Cor- cin 6 wialtineto | LBots 
value common stock that will be|poration, requested that the Year|} Trade sentiment as a whole is NGTON-Krasner's, Mre. R. Krasner, LOUISVILLE—-Stewart D. G. Ce; Miss EK.) On June 1, 1946, there will become and be due and ble upon each 
today 1946. * 2m. low. ,|inclined to the bear side owing to| west Hahtro Bicone tlt Co; M. Fed-|sT LOUIS-Seruggs-Vandervoort-Barney; J. T.| of the said Notes, at the office of the Company at fer we ae eee 


issued and outstanding following! gecy Exchange Commis-|May -.-..2- @ 7460 Tie 2. 
ny od wities and ps uly 4 : ‘ithe need of readjusting from an; *™4A, children’s wear. Settle, mdse. mgr. children's west jimec.| Boulevard in the City of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, or at the option of 


consummation of the company’s sion 4 
permit it to issue and sell to ; : ‘ . Arkwright, Ine., 128 W. Sist to-wear accessories: 
. a 9 es 3746 S71 2igs|0ld to a new crop basis during the BINGHAMTON—Mills, MeLean & Haskins: Mrs a es the holder at the office or agency of the Company at 380 Seventh 


recapitalization plan in May. The! : ae 
shares would be sold to Wertheim |** insurance companies 32,000 pre- san ae ; ; = eighteen trading — Me = we Be, je Mrs. M. Parsell, lingerie, w || Avenue, New York, N. Y., the priccipal amount thereof, together with 
& Co. and Lehman Brothers by ferred shares of stock, 4 per cent ee ; : i ceuing on new Frye con h c : 8) dove’ shoes, slippers: Miss MH Biitman. jun. eter. tineet, Mire | accrued interest thereon to the designated date of redemption, June 1, 
five of the company’s stockhold-|series, at $26.66 a share. The pro-|Oct. --.:..27. : ; A 1 $1.48% or $1.09% under the close tor wear: Miss 8. J. Nagle, infants’,’ éhil- 7 ; - ’ 1946, plus the premium set forth above. From and after such date 
ers. The underwriters pro tolceeds would be used by the com- eee af : on the May <n 4 today. Before BOSTON-—Gllchrist Co: Miss N. YanUim goods: ape ee Bw: itn arensen interest on said Notes will cease to accrue and coupons maturing subse 
offer part of the shares to the PUb-|beny to expand property and fa- 9 aT ee eer S: trading ceases, however, prices) dresses: 8. Myers, mdse. mgr, small wares, | YOUNGSTOWN Strouss- Hirshberg Co.; quent to such date will be null and void. 

lic at the initial offering prices be SPOT cannot decline more than 5 cents a  Regiigees, house. cheaper Greeove:| Mayet enrutinn donoeeae thes ow Coupon Notes should be accompanied by all coupons appertaining 
and the remainder to certain se-\"Uities. The new issue would (Basis 18/16-Inch Kemp, ‘neckwear.* handkerchiets;| sportawear. thereto. Registered Notes should be accompanied by duly ‘executed 


curity dealers. the company’s second series of a Ses Poraficlé Acseciates, 506 Sth Ave. | assignments or transfer powers in blank. 


The Miller-Wohl Company, Inc.,|preferred shares, the first series|Del! s|May rye will end at the close on CHICAGO-Wieboldt ‘Stores, Inc; Mrs. EV Lee — hanes Gee ee. PENNSYLVANIA COMPANY 
New York, registered 40,000 shares | being 32,000 shares, 4% per cent 


Crowley, silverware, clocks; F. A. Reynolds, CAT: L. N. ¥.—Outlet Shops; I. J. Palant 
: ‘ | By H.:\W. SCHOTTER, Treaswar 
of 41 per cent cumulative con-|series, now outstanding. 7 " 


:|May 22. women's hosiery, children’s ankiets’ C. L lectus 
vertible preferred stock, $50 par| The company’s application stated|Ausuts -...... 


: 
i 


3 


Saas 
SSRSsSszsE 


Trostie, } W. Albrecht CKET . 

ate «tage Pag pM e DALLAS—Sanger Bros ; “Miss “5. Preeiand to- wear D\Salsman, inaki, a: on May 1, 1946 

value, and 50,000 shares of that the proposed sale is part . , Sree ee tenlae cate, eerites: | TROE—Peertees Miss Zitin. better dressee ° 

stock, 50 cents par value, that|general program which anticipates|Ssrelan sis] Trade today notified the business) tinier. dresses: ‘Mics Bt. A. Werd, lingerie,| i, Meemmeere. ready-to-wear, Mr. Zimmer-| PRIVILEGE OF IMMEDIATE PAYMENT 

anid’ iho cat , Vd Little Rock |... conduct committee of the EX-| hesiigees house dresses tae “Rape a : ~ 
sice to be fed by ammomtmentio€ Me bende Ene pretmwed teu We) oar ca” [change to obtain daily reporte as] MANiLTON, One Winns, Tian ™laaurimone—ment Bros’ Min. 'v. RRutie,| 4, Noldere and registered owners ot a ie opae ecliod for sonoma 

Pr ce to be filed by amendmentiet its bonds and preferred stock is- isis? “iisa|to the position of individual ac-|HAmiLTON, Ont—G W. Robinson Co. Mrs linens. Miss B. Hauser, infants’ wear. 8. ineluding Notes maturing susequent to June 1, 1946, called for redemp- 

h rough a group of underwriters sued prior to the war and the sale ow York. ‘¢ 2m at ---|}counts in May rye and the volume Rice, t's Mrs. B. Anderson. notions. ——— i ae me — tion, and Notes maturing on June 1, 1946, and of said Twenty-five Year 
eaded by Allen & Co. All the | of new securities to obtain funds , wwe © a Salt of business of individual operators.|' Hicks. lingerie, rayon. cotton underwear Miss A. Levy, hosiery ony Shea. shoes. 34% % Secured Sinking Fund Notes, Series B, maturing June 1, 1969, 

common stock would be sold by|to carry on its post-war improve- SEC RITY REDEMPTIO The order is effective Orrow|“ANSING—F. N. Arbaugh Co: B. E Plcnett, | BALTIMORE — Stems ge — hg Baum-| called for redemption, may at their option surrender the same at aay 

four stockholders and all the pre-|ment and expansion eegeem. U E IONS and until further notice. PP ~~ ig ai er na A ee te — Shalow ¥ wear, . | time prior to June 1, 1946, and thereupon receive the full amount pay- 

. wear pgeaiggy 4 7 e ‘ , , i t . e 

ferred : age by on company. The| The commission denied a petition American Bemberg Corporati Effective at once, the Commod- oe SE, SAI TR , MA | able (including accrued interest to June 1, 1946) 

thr vy be nae | b . — og filed by the wy tage ren yoo Seven hundred shares of 7 per ity Credit Corporation has ordered woustitoen yw Cy Ly » M 

y e company Company and its su diary, e coun grain dealers to offer to ° he atiin's Store | 

construct and equip additional | Peoples Natural Gas Company, for we need a , pr ED gage ne it direct corn purchases under under wea: gt in ewe ' ’ eds, baseme | 

res. I ros rm . : a. + 

ja rehearing in respect of the pro- at Wank: of the Manhatten Gem the Government program of a fe “we gw oe i. 4 infanta. girls NOTICE OF REDEMPTION 


The Bingham Stamping Com-| posed sale by the Interstate Power bonus of 30 cents a bushgl over the shoes: Mrs. M. Bossidy. leather) Ton’, furnishings” - 
° 


pany, Toledo, Ohio, registered 100,-\Company to Peoples of certain of : ~ ceiling. The CCC is furnish | pfovct Co bheea te meee. me |CINCINNATI—Big Store Co: Miss C. Lichten- 
A - tion— roe ll directions. Miner # clothing + ah & me . pon stein. underwear, negligees, diouses, cotton 
= 


a porn = same ene physical properties of —¥ icon’ au eee ashe gar ae sted § | feed: Mise B'S. Barry. women’s, chitidren's| -,Srestes Yr Gundersheimer. | 
, refe ,|state for a base price of $162,500. a The order has result n muc ‘t under  Casterv ry, |COLUMBUS—The Fashion; A Gu mer. 
$10 par value, which would be sold; An application filed wep New| debentures of rch 1, 1955 at! confusion aad country shippers are Miss ‘A. Carr, handwerchiete ~ G. Doyle, ready-to-wear Miss R. H. Ridge-| NorTH AMERICAN RAYON CORPORATION 
to the public at $10 a share|pedford and Edison Light Com-| 103% on June 1 at J.P. Morgan|wiring both the Government|"fior coverings curtains, draperies, base eae met ae Co.; G. Goldman, | 261 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 16, N, Y. 

through a ey: of underwriters) pany, a subsidiary of the New Eng-| & Co., Inc. agency and Congressmen seeking RR Kelley. MT sg mg JOHNSTOWN, Pa—Glosser Bros.; P.M. Ben- : 

headed by Wm. J. Mericka & Co.,|iand Gas and Electric Association, LIVESTOCK IN CHICAGO to have the order changed eo that| Shes mots, celts anaen: ‘tt. he omit _ Bis, OMENS COMkG, Un. 6% Prior Preferred Stock 


Inc., and Goshia & Co. The pfos-| ion from the pro- 
pectus also covers 100,000 shares rt here. vena Jone pe gy 6 ts a) of the Pub- 








handbags, neckwear: Mre. L. Kasberger. jun- 2 
the; chippers may © Sammon Ser Grosse, Sridel ghee * Shio— King: NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that, pursuant to the provisions of 


lor dresses. be 
rou terminal markets &8/WATERBURY—Howland Mushes Co. # ; ' 
nt gt > MOUTH, ' Section 4 of its certificate of incorporation, North American Rayon Cor- 


They fear that Government Partridge, men's, boys’ wear, tove 
poration, a Delaware corporation, has elected to redeem and will redeem 


CHICAGO. April ao (AP)—Today’s repert of 
jere Assoc. Méeg. Corp, 1440 Bway 


$1 par value common stock into), Utility Holding Company Act] tne’ livestock markets 
7 | h by the United v . . 
which the preferred is convertible. \o¢ 1935 with regard to the issuance|*#te Department of Agricuture follows — red tape Will result in slOW Te-|,riawra-mich's, ine. Mire G. Senter. @iv.|WASMINGTON—Mecnt Co. R Rernbeimer ly 1, 1946, all of i ding 0% Prior P d Stock of th 
The proceeds from the sale would|and sale of notes payable to the! sssbie noes _ total. 18.s00,|/turns being made for the corn and| mdse. mgr: Mre. BE. Reeves. knit underwear curtaine: 8 Smith, éraperies: J. Goseens. on July seg 6, all of its outstanding 0% Prior Freterred stock of the par 
be used by the company to acquire| mirst National Bank of Boston in food and choice bar-|that grain may get out of condi-| Mr, D. Johnton. nowery, Mis. 8 Sanios'| evening dresses’ Miss M. Meathcote, sports: | Value of $50 per share. . 
a majority stock interest in the|, .ounts not exceeding in the ag-|rtins “com ceiling: sows $1419. tion on long hauls to the Atlantic) wear: J. C. Carson, boys’ wear, lugsane ‘| wear: R, Marks, bedding: Miss L. © Brien. Accordingly, the Corporation will pay on and after July 1, 1946 on the 
Herbrand Corpqration of Fremont, gregate $1,000,000 was approved took f.500 head. ore Coast and Gulf ports without han- | sii rimOne-itucier 7 o. @' 3 ME a yy . Anderson, shares of such stock represented by the certificates therefor, at the office 
Ohio. by the comsmiesten Gisente cattte, GAn Ee: teil, acne, ca-(Gling en route. tington. Mrs. M. Keythe, BN. Delahay. div.) hosiery, underwear: oH. A. Ops fof The Commercial National Bank and Trust Company of New York, 

The Harrison Wholesale Com- os Mariet Elect ic Com lable calves, 700; total. 700. Fed steers and) Brokers say country grain deal- Heise, gloves netiwear Mire “f penmett.| Pinkus, dresses: HB Cohen. shoes; Mise M.|46 Wall Street, New York 15, N. Y., the redemption price per share of 
pany, Chicago, registered 85,600 peggy arog ? PANY: | yearlings | including rearling _neitore 7008: lors will not cooperate with the| {evelry. handvags; Basement. Mre NK.) Corey, infants’ wear $50 and accrued dividends to the date of redemption. 
shares of $1 par value common|Marietta, Ohio, asked the commis-|iiins (sims buyer pressure, however, on \Government under the new order|BOstOk-Wm Vilene’ ons Cot. “Brevtten . & Se Cx. Swe From and after July 1, 1946 all dividends shall cease to accrue on the 
stock that is to be sold by two offi-/"0" for permission to issue and tirictly choice, eatte: Cad food sua cheics|generally. Some corn will go di-| milinay. Vv aultiven: mines” ents, ‘au Cee Tit dross, spouses? | 6% Prior Preferred Stock hereby called for redemption, and all rights with 
cers through underwriters headed |*¢!! 3,750 shares of its $100 par) vey. ! stock ‘cattle ee from the country to dry mill- ciNCiNWATT John ahilite Ge; tassmentt, L | CLEVELAND Cleveland Mase. Co; Mr. and) respect to such stock shall forthwith after such redemption date cease and 
by Brailsford & Co. The offering|V@!Ue capital Btock to the Monom-isserce to stenay, top on ted steers, top lers and wet processors to be con-| wemen's’ junior costs, suite ture |DEPOSIT, N.Y —Bassin Dept. Store; Mr. determine, except only the right of the holders to receive the redemption 
price of the stock would be $9.625 Shel Py ag a aah one peters, Sir: ow vy beef built. | verted into products for export CLEVELAND Higbee Co Misa W. Cameron. | gi tranhtn mary. N. C—Rucker & sheety Price therefor, but without interest. 
a share. aneiotte : 14 th we My mtv . the chotee, vealore, ‘so bulk of stock cattle under another Government order anton, floor coverings; iiss MM. Jorgerson gk eee ons, Gate, ome By order of the Board of Directors 

a u - , , . ; | HONESDALE, Pa — ; Mr. 
wen fe ‘ “Greases: Mins No Meek. sportswear: | 4 NORTH AMERICAN RAYON CORPORATION 


tn 
Food Fair Stores, Inc., Philadel- ~ mdse 
phia, registered 40,000 shares of $1 pee 4 anager ore ~ antin . ayer. e Corn Receipts ve qn ; Miss a a MOUNT CARMEL a5 —Guinan's Dept. Store: | Rata Mitmthens 
par value common stock issuable | Monong ola and for additions Slaughter Taonbe eve 2. Primary receipts of corn today|Wrniture R. Wren. piece foods: J. Baner,\OlL CITY. Pa-Welker & Maxwell Co; Mr./ wee 
ystems Peis th? wee aggregated 859,000 bushels, com-| shoes: basement. "R. Mather. girls’ teen-age gPRicerht DS, “Mo-—Buby Bee Dept. Store: May 1, 1946 : : 
eo | ’ . 


upon options to purchase common . KL ; ‘ 10; um to 

stock. The options were issued to| _ The Commission approved an @p-|sociea lambs, “hie bo; food to choice | pared with 569,000 a week ago and} Rites. ‘misses chilaren's shoes M Palmer | A Rosen. gem mdse | 

certain executives, officers and su-|Plication filed by the Union Elec-|it Siren. oMivighter ewes about siesdy ai/ 1,791,000 @ year ago. Shipments) women's shows: Mrs "B oleomea'tta-|WAl work on RN A Ac pin mn 
tric Company of Missouri propos-|§7.s0 ‘aewn. were 338,000 bushels, against 369,-|pavTON—Rixe-Kumier Co.” Miss M_ Kimball |WHITEMALL. N. ¥ “Ginsburg s Smt. Sue ———— _— sous = a : 


pete Bee eo oe x Ss ing to sell competitively 130,000 2 gee ee Ne RY tivel fenier sportewser: & div, mdse. mer 

1945, entitling them to purchase ’ FUTUR CONTR ACTS 000 and 1,085,000, respectively. = - @* We B. F. Levis, 218 W. 40tn 

the stock at $19.50 a AB The|shares of cumulative net Siete E Prices for the principal grains peimorty. Misdson Co" Tatton, vlect | CHESTER, Pe.-May Store| Mr. Levine. ready. WARNING! ' 
P 00 mo goods. . Everett. neon. her) to-wear, sportewear, smallwares, hosiery, lin-| 

stock was listed yesterday at 651, |*tock with a stated value o S were as follows: erie “ | ro rae cerrinicare wovoras or | | PRILADELPRIA ELECTRIC 


on the New York Stock Exchange. |#are. CHICAGO—R & R Mostery 





ane sanees ees Se. pee Sare ——- Browne. LM. resses, sportewear, fh a NEW YORK TITLE & MORTGAGE CO 
The options cannot be eRercaed tere ae eee tle ot can AMY He St Gh nme me: SEAT, oe, ar, nana] Berta tat Sone. EM ne | St —o ie NAAT 
ore Sept. 5, e proc ’ } Meee |S ;  arae ’ -. t , 
from the sale, if ali the options are|Cumulative $5 preferred on a share- Other coving bids rt Ye H . July. Set. Closing prices: May. duly, Sept., 1.21% » Pinen, ei Metend Moor ert a Disce foods. I wish to notify you that I have C)); d d N 
exercised, will amount to $780,000|for-share basis. Shares of the $5 De. ts : farce 138.8 oaTs one es. ti, aX, CLEVELAN Havre Co; w. 4. | Ea fam a =e dg he perchese TE Awiden olives 
and would be used for corporate|/preferred not offered for exchange GR se WOOL Open. Mian. Low. Close. Close. oth “J. BR. Sutton, corsets; H.C. Riech.| Se = baslery, lingerie : 
purposes. would be redeemed at $110 « share,| ,,, , re BS By BB Bl aBNAboc-t. agen a Oo: seus ot GRBEANER “hte “abs, “ES nal tee || of the trust property located ot 1] 61 givigcng PREFERENCE 
— —_— ‘plus accrued dividends. The com- jay eS SS Spy soy Ay % 0% an Bchenck. cheaper dresses: Mrs R. Mayfield.| | mdse : Epreglies 211-225 West 6let Street, New |} 
UTILITY PLANS STOCK SALE pie oe ae ar at ovas Wife (tegen, May, gi, OF Dew, oasnn:: SOR e oO 7 marr Siu. idknats toe rea v, mdse Mate aes sparen aMr__Beipwacks, corte RAT aes ge ogg | COMMON STOCK 
; x |the usual ten-day or Spot 98.00. Ma 250 25 ELES a, ie | pays ,000 cash. out- fo 7 per 
Cosing prices: July, . Dec, 1.48%. a B. a a y. © m ~ Mr. Pt Re y - do- standing publicly held certifi- if 6 ee ee oa 
mestics. | dend Pi Common Stock has 





Southern California Water Com- , 
9 ing bids, since the company’s sched- COTTONSEED OIL sportawear: 
siiotansy. Spec for advertising for bids) cong pis May. Wy. Set. Ost Det.) croung prices: MAY. uly: Sept. Dee. L204 | mdse mst.” womens cody ines Min A L. Levitan, 490 1th Ave. cates im this isowe amount to 
Special to Tur New Yorn Trwes on May 1 an © opening e z ; COCOA ji LARD eect. es.. 4.80 tobrios egg! D ktlaworth, corsets: | BALTIMORE—Wetzier's; Miss Maged, lingerie,| $446,890.70. ‘ 
PHILADELPHIA, April 30—The| bids on May 8. Closing prices: July, Sept.. Dec , 8.86 —, "raionsapelis on — C. B. Cooper, mdse. mar.. housewares Rese- | niet gee, Darreush. apertecsar. Neva, | die ' close af business on June t, 1946, 
Closing prices: July. Sept, Dee.. 1.7% sian, mang colin ayy pos se LENIGHTON. Pa--Cohen's Dept. Store; Miss! emapinen on paths | pgs Rupa 
3 . . a ayto re r * 1 a ; 
SHUTDOWN IS NRAR, !%Tseusaneta”te4,craetzts tdi ftent | Onne om ml GRAY ee i LF nate a wr com | sear cence mtn we be || COMMON SCE 
, ° 3 Winn » div. r. b+ i j A dividend of chert « (8.29) 
j to March 31, including 37,800 for- ported yesterday. siiiae oT, ot: ail 4 Sone, sportewear, Tite. HK. Wicklund.) LriMOns—dullus 0 Oo, 0 B. ae, ’ fore first consulting me. a share on i Canin Sia ss 
mer employes, while the number; The profit was equal to 40 cents prices: 7 a y. «BUD. oal tgs C. Capwell Co; Mrs. 5 Val-| Sore Pe. nce: tees 2. Renee, ciate DANIEL W. BLUMENTHAL, Trustee doctarod, povelt June 38, 19 
_ " of women employes had fallen tojeach on the 3,240,525 shares of eee? 2.78 2.73 27 273 1.4044 PHI HIA—Strawbridge & Clothier: © CHESTER, re.—Speare Bros ’ 475 Fifth Avenue, New York City of business c@ June |, 1946, 
<q 1944 : ieratasueent wher FI with $1,875,502 or isle ity ts UB fag ae Gm ‘ee am ae pa | a és. ‘| — e 
a ° " , . * sportswear . ~ . 
Y 4 y nishings; f. HM. Clot 34. div Fal eS : ’ : # © winece, 
Continent Prom Pago st lege 2ELIOL es a cc tod eure satan the unrer| come mow ES, an | Re Retr Satie mrs a actrees 
PErtshUnGit Joseph Morne Co; Miss M.| mése. mer VENUE TRAMSIT Bd Apeit 23, 1906 
Miss C Ausbey 4 


$839,247, against $865,238, and|compared with 293,077 and $222,-\ended with March, 1945. T ing, women's. misses’ sults, raincoats, |MORGA WN, W. Va.—@idler’s Dept. Store; 
State local and ila 687,572 in the 1044 period. euintqnatamannmnes Closing prices: duly tet. Dee., 1.77%. & neediework ; basement. M. mt a ge ween’, Qaass wear. 
, miscellaneous The f ti of the) LOSS FOR REPUBLIC STEEL . cons } ng » div. mdse . mur; Mrs. D. Anderson, a) =x yer: A. %., Gen, wees 
taxes were $5,146,437, against $6,- inancial post ——_—__—— Gestng prices: May. July, 1.10% RICKMO » basement. W.|PORT HURON, Mich—J. B. Bperry Co, Mrs. 

re Def ts. Cash prices follow: Kocen, di ; : J. Weinberger, house, C. Hall, accessories; R. Stevenson, men’s, 

434,360. Company Reports icit o 347,- Chicago Cash lard, 14.05b: loose dresses. rtecd. on, corsets P ; MacPherson. » 
The Federal income tax credit/reduced 412 for Three Months lard, 13.05b ETF ade “ee ee cor OY es: Mee, bent, sendy teeter, ie 
— . r WORCESTER—Wm. Filene’s Sons Co; Mra.| fants’ me foundations. 

Se ees yeh were $585,528 44, compared aswith| CLEVELAND, April 30 U)—Re- ny minneapolis —Wheat, No. 1 dark) 's 'x: Law, womens, mises’ dress RICHMOND-Hutsler “& CoM. L. Mutaler, 
quarter of 1945 The ci ns had $568,198,504 a year before and ne Steel Corporation reported oe tsp Whest No. 2 ALBANY—John G. Myers Co. Mr. MeDowd, sw ~y S gee B. Starr, BS. M. Black~| corner of 
. t'for the; With $60,760,252 on Dec. 31. The|today s consolidated net loss of), 74 'si 713i 861. Sy peed. men's weer **Y. wat tHaM—Parke-Snow, Inc: M. M. O'Con-| Patten, City of New 1 


no carry-back tax credit for the $347,412 for the first quarter of Kohn & Co.: Miss 0r, domestics, silke, trunks, } 4 
quarter inasmuch as it’ was not corporation spent $9,100,000 on ad- ‘ s 1s ; , shoes. | arther B. Litimen, 2 » Wh WwW. ‘ for ; , 1946, 
¥ 1946, in contrast with a consolidat-/ Wheat Subsidy Continued |cuicado—chas A. Mevens & Co: Miss I.|posToN—Coleman's, Miss’ Th sasinane om UNL. DODGE, Treaserer 


subject t ditions and improvements to fa- 
) © excess profits taxes in cilities, and had $232,000,000 sched- ed net income of $3,084,548 for the WASHINGTON, April 30 “— "Miss H. Nea wet cane a a R. ey 
° . airs, ‘ 
mdse 


1945 or 1944, Mr. Olds said. first quarter of last year. 
Pittsburgh Output 21.5 P. 0. |"Shioments of ateel products dur-|_ C.M, White, president, and, o.|The Reconstruction Finance Cor-|°r"p""Ungsore a ‘len LA-M, fnallonbars & Co: 
Steel production by corporation] ing the first quarter totaled 2,718,-|irdler, chairman, in a joint state-|Poramon announ yey underwear, dresses: Mrs Es a te 
mills in the Pittsburgh area wasigg4 net tons, com g with|ment declared the concern was|5i0 68 on Wheat ground ino nour ‘, hl: 
down to 21.5 per cent of capacity|5,001,245 in the first quarter of|OPerating now at 70 per cent of 
this week due to the coal strike,|1945. The company lost 2,900,000/#Pacity and a continuation of the ‘ it 
and output in the Chicago area is|tons of steel ingot production dur-|Co#! strike would have a “very NAVAL STORES 
45.4 per cent, Mr. Olds said. Dueling the steel strike, Mr. Olds said./*¢Tious effect” on production, SAVANNA 
to moderately higher operations at | Income in the first quarter of|ss4: no 
other United States Steel centers,! JONES & LAUGHLIN NET OFF |1946, the report added, was credit-/"Kotin' Wo otterings: ; 100; | Sear: Mise "M. Doig. neg 
the corporation as a whole is pro- pct actin auth jed with a minimum tax credit of|no shipments: : “a . abs Mise Smith sportewear. 
ducing at 45.5 per cent of capacity'$813,246 for Quarter, Against $1,815,000 and restoration from|,2%°f a hy By YE eA. 


this week, compared with 52.3 per $2,013,489 in 1945 contingent reserves of $3,100,000 — 
cent last week and with 52 per to cover approximate net excess) ifn no recipe, ne shipments, socks. 3 3 mason 


cent for the first quarter. Net income of the Jones & charges in January and February |barrels nerros 
Laughlin Steel Corporation and ni No receipts; mo shipments; stocks 7 «Tamer 
The corporation is relatively |#Ugniin l po: due to the steel strike. asm cn sk Paiva rua oo te — se 


much worse off than other stee!|*#ubsidiaries for the March quarter 


producers because Philip Murray,|this year amounted to $613,246, ; 6, 108, 

President of the United bteclwerk. equal after preferred dividend re-| QUT-OF-TOWN EXCHANGES y witica of Becton | CARBON COMPANY 

ers of America, CIO, would not|quirements, to 13 cents each on ty » 1948 , : Concsentive 

allow union members to handle|?,047,046 common shares, the quar-| CHICAGO CHICAGO SAN FRAN, SAN FRAN, the S my . Nénety-Bighth Con 

coal during the steel strike in|tetly report disclosed yesterday. Close. (Continued) Bales mx (Continued) Tree freaken Quarteriy Dividend 

January and February this year,|This compares with a net of ; $00 aleske ie | sates, 

Mr. Olds said. Inasmuch as the/$2,013,489 or 80 cents each on Gee aitke thesel i 

company’s coal mines had no stor-|1,602,488 common shares for the 

age facilities in the Pittsburgh|first quarter a year ago. 

area, many miliions of tons mined| The policy adopted on the re- 

during the steel strike were sold|Setve created out of income from 

to outside interests and no reserves|1941 to 1944 is to transfer to in- 

could be accumulated at the coke|Come account such amounts as are 

ovens, he added. required to absorb the cost of 
Now the corporation is reducing strikes and other matters incident 


production progressively to con-|© reconversion, the says. 


serve coal. If necessary it will wr, » $4,000,000 was 
terminate stee) production in order transfe rom reserve for con- 


to keep enough coal on hand to tingencies to income account for 
retain heat in the blast furnaces|‘he first quarter of 1946 on ac- 


and otherwise keep equipment in count of extraordinary expenses 
condition to restore service. incurred as a result of the Jan- 


uary-February steel strike. If 


If the corporation does not have 
to cease steel production Mr. Olds|that transfer had not been made, 


believes that output can be re-|the report continues, results for 
stored to a fairly high rate within|the quarter would have shown a 
two or three weeks of the end of |!08*. 

the coal strike. The corporation's PAN DOT I INC 

loss in coa) production for the past AMERICAN ROLLING MILL 
thirty days now exceeds 2,500,000/ Net Profit of $1,804,487 Is Shown 


tons, he said. 

A collateral effect of the coal]  *f First Quarter of Year 
strike is that 32,000 steel employes| The American Rolling Mill Com- 
ef the company are out of work,|pany and its subsidiaries showed 
with a loss of $340,000 daily in'for the first three months of this 


z 
: 
| 


3°55" 3 33 


SoeSSSSSESE cBSFSE 


= Directors of Cotumbien Cartes 
eompany have deciered « regular 
So en Sr 
eee ee ee ee tein inant 


a3 P.M. 
GEORGE L. BUBB 
Treasurer 


nh 


7 
- 


883 
ssc 
anf 


: 
. 


> 
E 
2 
= 
£ 


Es 
res 
° 
3 


i 


f-% 
RAgzas 
Raa Peo 
fh 
Bits 
oF Be5 

Hy 


; 
4 
. 
> 
: 
3 


foetal 
SSeUays 


i 


Sek s8E u¥eSUs 8 ait 


a 
1 
| 


i 
‘ 


= 
2 
= 
z 
$ 


i 
E 
g 


g 

3 
Se 883 
Hiker 


| 


i 


EE atte 
i 
nit} 

; 

F 


: 


New York 5,N.Y. 


S2sdutecen stereeets sstseiese 


: 
i 


oh 
“ : is 5 o 
ssg¥¥etopscecesss 


fe 


4 16320 Common Divipaxp 
Saving) 4 regular dividend of Seventy-five 
(75¢) per share has been declared upos 
Common Stock and Common Stak B 
Tum Awmatcam Tosacco Comrary, 
able in cash om Jume 1, 1946, to stock- 


holders of business te 
May Ayhe gh eal bo walled ‘Alert investors whe want profitable 
Seem A, Beaten, Peer turn to The New York Times for information. 


| tpril 30, 1946 


227% 
=o8 
* 


2 
i 
F 


i ul 


So FS BSyMyressecerp eseergcon es ces Egupic 


Peers tits iets tt 


i 
i 


Qa 

2: 
2s 

= 58 


= 


- 
3 


welary 


2 
2 


Rin it ee 
: fe 


SSSUBESELTTES 28S E63 


e 
3 
2 


‘ 





STERLIN 
SILVER 


For Immediate 
Delivery 


Complete line of Sterlin 
and Plated Holloware 


Tables-—Lamps 


EXPORTERS 


BUSINESS 


(PA TO PRESS FIGHT| Advertising News and Notes |SEES RADIO MOVE 


ON PRICE VIOLATORS 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, 


newly created post as director of 


Accounts 
bric promotion and publicity. 


Roger Kent, Inc., retail clothier,| 


BUSINES 


WHOLESALE COMMODITY FRices 
U. &. Bureau of Labor Statistics 


10 DOUBLE MARKET 


Index 


S WORLD 


a 


BUSINESS 


SUIT BOARD PRACTICES 
DEFENDED BEFORE FTC 


Trade practices adopted by the 
National Coat and Suit Industry 


Will Assist President 


eas 


Herman E. Siegel, formerly with 


.2 
_o 


(28) 
190.2 
190.1 


to H. W. Fairfax Advertising H 
Agency, Inc., for a newspaper 
campaign which begins in THE 
New YorK TIMES in the first week Agency. 


of June. 
Maxwell I. Andrews, formerly 
E. G. Staude Manufacturing|with the Bureau of Advertising, 


Company, division of the Sperry Publish 
The enforcement division of the Corporation, to Chas. Dallas Reach American = Nowapaper ~~ 


Enforcement Drive to Center 
on Apparel Manufacturers, 
Wholesalers, Retailers 


orace H. Nahm Company, has/Asch Charges Producers Plan sn” 
or 


bee inted producti ; ine 
erer op” Altomart Advertising| to Center on AM Output in °46 
and Turn to FM Next Year 


Apr 
Apr 
| Apr 
Apr 
Apr 

1045 


ee 

3 32333333 

So ~~ 
ZBzEEzF 


637 
* index is based 


| 
Most of the t ty- 
Seeking @ double market for| Mot of ihe twenty-eigh 


-3 


Of Mangel Store Chain 


Recovery Board were defended as 
jnecessary for the preservation of 
jthe women's garment industry by 
Samuel Klein, executive director of 
the Industrial Council of Cloak, 
Suit and Skirt Manufacturers. He 
testified at the hearing on charges 
|by the Federal Trade Commission 


Office of Price Administration is|Company. Lee-Muiron Rousseau is)yo-, gun, as assistant national|their products with a “Sell them 


planning to increase the number 
of criminal prosecutions of willful 
violators of OPA regulations, in- 
cluding apparel manufacturers, 
wholesalers and retailers, it was 
said last night by Joseph Forer, 
director, apparel and industrial 
materials, enforcement division, 
OPA. He spoke at a symposium 
under auspices of the Federal Bar 
Association of New York, New 
Jersey and Connecticut in the 
United States Court House. 
Criminal action is especially 
planned, he said, against manu- 
facturers and wholesalers who are 
“flagrantly disre pre-tick- 
eting requirements and retailers 
who are ripping the tickets off 
ts they receive. The pre- 
ticketed price is, in our opinion, 


Association, hag joined The New 


account executive. advertising manager. 

Sage Laboratories, Inc., manu-| Julius M. Zwick, recently dis- 
facturers of Sage Air Refresher, to/, from the Armed Forces, 
Paris & Peart. Newspapers, radio ay named assistant to the 
and trade publications. resident of Ma‘lograph Company, 

Butterly and Green, Inc., real es- fne. 
tate, to Gunn Mears Advertising| 8. Creed Cardwell has joined the 
Agency. advertising sales staff of Barron's 

Resisto Products to Lancaster|National ess and Financial 
Advertising Agency. Murray Soko!| Weekly. 
is account executive. 

Stern & Mann, Canton, Ohio, to 
Spadea, Inc., for a special retail 
institutional campaign in news- 
papers. 


Notes 


Lansing Moore, former Detroit 
advertising agency executive and 
Army Air Forces veteran, has 
opened his own agency at 1472 

Personnel Broadway, here, and at Room 804, 

Richard Wilcox, formerly asso-|Fox Building, Detroit, Mich. 
ciate editor of Life Magazine and; Neal D. 
recently discharged from the Coast| moved to new quarters in the Ar- 
Guard, has joined LaRoche & Ellis|chitects Building, Seventeenth and 
as an account executive. Samson Streets, Philadelphia. 


Ivey Company has 


+ . 
now and sell them again next year” Buyers’ Total Higher 
plan, radio manufacturers are! Visiting buyers registered in the 
stressing production of AM sets|New York market for the week 
now and will turn out FM sets\¢nded yesterday numbered 1,951, 
next year, Leonard L. Asch, presi- mg y = as be me 
dent of station WBCA, Schenec- matte of tant year, asserting to ene 
tady, charged yesterday. “FM hasiiists published in THE NEW YORK 
made AM obsolete and manufac-| Times. 
turers know it,” Mr. Asch asserted|day totaled 1,007, compared with 
at the second annual radio and|656 last Tuesday. During April 
business conference sponsored by|®-835 buyers were recorded, against 
the City College School of Busi- 
ness in the Hotel McAlIpin. 
Presenting the manufacturer's 
side in the panel discussion which 
gauged FM's impact on radio and 
, Frank W. Mansfield, di- 
rector of sales research, Sylvania 
Electric Products, Inc., predicted 
production of 16,000,000 FM sets 


an increase of 8.5 per cent. 
eS ees 


Foreign Buyers Seek Plastics 


Manufacturers are finding 
sharply increased interest in plas- 
tic merchandise for export. A 
tally shows substantia! orders were 
booked by a number of fabricato 
jat the exposition last week, par- 


Arrivals .reported yester-| _ 


6,297 in the same month of 1945,| 


alleging restraint of trade against 
|the Board, fourteen other trade as- 
sociations, and the International 
Ladies Garment Workers Union. 
The hearing was held in the of- 
fices of Willkie, Owen, Otis, Farr 
and Gallagher, 15 Broad Street. 

Referring to the regulation 
adopted by the board banning the 
shihpment of merchandise on con- 
signment, one of the rules to which 
the FTC objects, Mr. Klein said 
that the Industrial Council imposed 
the prohibition in 1930 when re- 
tailers began to ask for consign- 
ment shipments because of de- 
pressed business conditions. 

Ms. Klein commented that “if 
the goods were displayed on «a 
rainy Saturday, the manufacturer 
found his garments back on his 


Col. Milton M. Fritch hands on Monday or Tuesday. The 
” return tended to undermine our 


Col. Milton M. Fritch, General market completely.” He estimated 
Staff Corps, hag been released|that returns during the depression 





y 


the consumer's greatest protec- 
tion in buying apparel.” 

Mr. Forer further revealed that 
the division is revising its enforce- 
ment program in the retail field 


Lieut. Col. W. J. Fuchs has re-| Curtice Brothers Company, 
joined the Anfenger Advertising| Rochester, has launched a news- 
Agency as account executive in the| paper and radio campaign for its 
St. Louis office, after Army serv-| new uct, Chicken and Vegeta- 

a view toward suspending |'*: ble Dinner. Duane Jones m- 
~ mente of habitual violators. I John D. Wentz, recently returned) pany, Inc., ia the agency. 
also intends to continue the major|from the Army, has rejoined Wil-| Whitney Publications, Inc., re- 
son Products, Inc., Reading, Pa.,/ cent successor to the Whitney Pub- 


within the next two years. The 
public is well-acquainted with the 
advantages of frequency modula- 
tion, he asserted, and has taken 
“a realistic view” about the prob- 
ability of a somewhat higher price. 
In turning out such war production 
as radar and similar instruments 


jticularly for such items as trays, 
bowls, servers, cigarette boxes, etc. 
{The buyers included representatives 
jof South America, South Africa, 
China and Sweden. 

* * ® 


Overseas Parcels Considered 





survey mn in the men's wear 
men’s tailored cloth- 
shirts and shorts; and ex- 


facturers of women's clothing, in- 
cluding both outerwear and under- 
wear. Evidently referring to 
pending Congressional action on 
OPA, he said: “The next few 


Fountain Pen Manufacturer weeks or days will tell whether 


Offers for PROMPT DELIVER 
LEVER PENS—1é kt. iridium- 
ie Pet 


Y 


and 
Display 


——CHEMICAL MACHINERY 

bi eel tanks, 720-gallon ce 
Zh. inciuaing all pipes connect 
series, valves, notors, 


conveyor tables, 
. motors, 


fabric CO T-5140, or write 
on ¢-gauge 


these than 
dreams. 
As for nylon hose, Mr. Forer ex- 
plained, certain hosiery mills, 
some of which are now being in- 
vestigated, are feeding the nylon 
et “but their produc- 

only a small fraction of the 

." The amount supplied by 

the mills, he added, is supplement- 
ed by certain jobbers and retail- 
ers who sell to peddlers the alloca- 
ons they receive riodically 
their suppliers. retail- 


plans are more 


as advertising and sales promotion! lishing Company, has changed the 
manager. name of American Cookery to 

Eloise Davies, formerly with No-|Better Food--The Professional 
fade Fabrics, will join Hafner As-|Magazine of Food Education and 
sociates, Inc., on May 6, in a'Group Feeding. 


BUSINESS NOTES 


John C. McMullen has been ap-;poration, Wallingford, Conn., has 
pointed general manager of the|opened offices and showrooms in 
Passaic plant and a member of the|the Hotel Breslin, 1186 Broad- 
board of directors of the New/way. Louis Zuckerman and Joseph 
Weston Biscuit Company. He has|Braunstein are the representatives. 
been succeeded as general sales} The Cold Metal Products Com- 
manager at Passaic by William) pany, Youngstown, Ohio, producers 
B. Van Emburgh, formerly man-\of ‘cold-rolled strip steel, has 
ager of the Clifton branch. opened sales offices at 500 Fifth 

Col. Samuel Sloan Auchincloss,| Avenue here. William H. Rees is in 
at the time of his release from|charge as district sales manager 
service assistant chief signal offi-|of cold metal in Youngstown. 


new known as 


allied to radio, the industry has} following the 

enlarged its facilities from a $300,-| ators, Seaaianinnt accent 
000,000 output to an annual War-isidering promotion of food parcels 
time production of $3,600,000,000,\ror overseas shipment, it was re- 
Mr. Mansfield pointed out. As &/norted in th@ trade yesterday. In 
least nine times, and probably ten| assembled packages to be sent 
or twelve times, ite pre-war out-| «broad, grocers stated that the fea- 


put.” ture would undoubtedly prove a 
Herman Hettinger, director of| protitable development. 
editorial extensions, Crowell-Col- “o- « 
lier Publishing Company, stressed : 
the need for allowing a great) Must Comply With SO-122 
deal of flexibility and a great] The s goods regulations, 
SO-122, 8 a wholesaler who 


deal of room for “trial and er- 
ror in developing FM" as well sells war sur>lus goods to another 
as facsimile and television. Point-|wholesaler either to divide his 
ing out that more money will have) mark-up with the buyer or to ap- 
to be spent on programs in order) ply to the Office of Price Adminis- 
to hold audiences, Mr. Hettinger tration for an individual mark-up, 
said that “the entire future of the! the al office of the OPA 
new medium will be more depend-| warned yesterday. The provision 
ent upon programming than ¢ver'aiso applies to a retailer who sells 
before in its history.” surplus goods to a wholesaler. 
Stuart Peabody, director of ad-| Seliers who have not complied with 


from active duty and has joined years amounted to $20,000,000 an- 
the Mangeil Stores as controller 
and assistent to the president, Sol 
Mangel, it was announced yester- 
day. Colonel Fritch entered the 
service in June, 1942, and served 
in several capacities, most recent- 
ly as Chief of Finance, Army Ex- 
change Service. Prior to entering 


nually out of $250,000,000 volume. 
There is, he said, “a 10 per cent 
fringe among retailers who are 
ready to ride roughshod over the 
manufacturers, although 90 per 
jcent of the retailérs are ethical.” 


| 


BUSINESS RECORDS 


BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS 
SOUTHERN DISTRICT 
Petitions Filed—Against 


| EXPERT BRAID CO.. 347 West Broadway 
| Accurate Slittt Co., Inc, for $218: Alfr 


the Army, he was controller of 
Saks-Fifth Avenue and chairman 
of the Metropolitan Controllers 


Association. 
chanic 'Co., $43 @ members of the firm 


ASKS WAA 10 SPEED "Ss.Ssh cee BP 
SURPLUS DISPOSAL ms:ss aso ue 


see's. $2.710 (of which §2 is im insurance 
policies) 





Cover Wire me. $296: Electr®e Me- 


mkruptey Discharges 
Albert Karp. “79 B 924 St: J Bloomfield, 
1806 Avenue V; Harr 


Bank, 2418 Corte! 
Albert Pero, 4 s.: J “ 


llth ose 
Locastro, 374 Met ~ 


item Ave: Alex 
163 Bay 2th St.; uline Blum, 645 


Continued From Page 37 


airplane manufacture. It was em- 
phasized that during the war the William Moonis, 2225 
companies had priorities but now), /'s>es 


Cc 
they have to stand in line for much) Rockaway: ‘opson, 92-47 St, 
mhurest’ Sam Farb. 97-235 Whit ° 
smaller orders Jamaica: Benjamin Holiber 32-15 384307 
Jackson Heights; Luigi Quaranta, 23-3) Seth 
on Acierte 
eorge White, 115-35 148th St.. Jamaica: Elize~ 
beth London, 109-15 Farmers Bivd Qusens; 
Lawrence Avellina, 
maice; William 
Flusht 


N. 
na. 


= 


rook 


TOY DELIVERIES PUSHED 
Much Merchandise Shipped on 


ers, he said, are giad to get rid of cer on the staff of General Mac- company vertising of The Borden Company, |this provision cannot legally charge 


A 
the hose, which constitutes a mer-|Arthur, has been appointed vice)y wn Togs, Inc., to manufac- 
dising problem, “particularly |president of the American Machine/ture girls’ and childrens’ sports- 
t prices the peddiers offer.” ‘ |and Foundry Company's AMF pin-| wear in the popular price range, 
—_—_———______—— spotter division. has been formed with Meyer Siegel 
Charlies A. Mitchell, formerly|as head of the organization. 
assistant sales manager and gen-| Mrs. Rosalie Titley Allardice, 
eral tale ee as hed forl|now with Kirby, Block ant ~~ 
Goods Chef Boy-Ar- Quality Foods, , will join Independen 
oe ey ths A ge ete ot Inc., has been appointed sales onal Syndicate on May 15 as 
he will not seek re-election, the/™@"@ser for Beacon a buyer of all daytime and casual 


associa _|Corporation, manufacturers 
lowing at gp yt mae — household liquid cleaners, bleaches 
board of directors before the an-|#"4 starch. ' 

nual convention May 15,16 and 17.| Harry L. Schaenman has beeN|ig Navy for two, three, four or 
The board has elected Mr. Brooks|*ppointed buyer of toys, radios.) 1. ,.or5 For additional informa- 
honorary chairman of the board to|@nd appliances in the New York 3 ‘4 ¢ United 
hold office permanently as long|office of Meier & Frank Company, on, go your sieie a - a 
as he shall be a aaaiee of the|Portland, Ore. States Navy Recruiting Station 
board. The McTavish Sportswear Cor-'once. 


EXINOOATS Ee ee eat ails 
to 
twills, oe ceiling 


Brooks Honorary Chairman 
H. L. Brooks, who is complet- 
ing his tenth consecutive term as 


You may now enlist in the Regu- 


GENERAL MERCHANDISE— 
a Stocks nage 


price, 


white and 


sy wiece-Tar-alfvadi les g 
eg Sr 


foreign firms. 


baguettes, machine cut, cashion 


stated that as F'M develops it will 
get increasing advertising use by 
local merchants. John V. L. Ho- 
president of the Interstate 
roadcasting Company pointed out 
that one of the difficulties in pres- 
ent FM station operation was ina- 
bility to gauge its audience. Pres- 
ent audience measurement systems 
take too small a sampling to ac- 
curately gauge the number of FM 
listeners, he said. 

Linnea J. Nelson, chief time buy- 
er, J. Walter Thompson Company, 
emphasized that FM in itself did 
not create a new audience. Addi- 
tions of popular programs tended 
to divide an audience rather than 
increase it, she said. 


RAYONS 


large 
BAYO! 
ity f 


sizes 423, 6x2,| for qu 


ON, all quanililes under MM pricr- 
BATONS a allies ander MO precy ‘ 


more than their net cost, the agen- 
cy said. Most wholesaler sales to 
retailers and retailer sales to con- 
sumers, OPA added, will require 
mark-up authorization by OPA and 
these authorizations can be ob- 
tained at all regional and district 
offices. 
e's Ss 


Jobbers Show Little Interest 


Wholesale liquor dealers in the|to be sure of having goods on 


Metropolitan aree to date have ex- 
hibited little interest in the move- 
ment to form a new public rela- 
tions organization for their level 
of the industry, it was learned yes- 
terday. The movement is said to 
have made some headway upstate. 


GENERAL MERCHANDISE— 


LW Tenet] _ Standard Lines & 
. 15 


> 


$1 
swivel 
low 
655 6 Av. 


COSMETICS, 50,000 
lipsticks 


branded cosmetics; 
nental Commod! 
DOLLS 


Little Women) beautifully 
boxed, $11.40 doz; 
$1.95-§2.25. Gotham 


“When Ready’ Basis to Trade 


Toy manufacturers, still pressed) 
by shortages of materials, are try-| 
ing to push deliveries on the heavy! 
volume of orders placed for both 
seagona] and Christmas merchan-'| 
dise earlier this year. Much mer-| 
chandise is being shipped on a) 
“when ready” basis and retailers 
in numerous instances are taking) 
delivery for warehousing in order 


hand. | 

Steel, however, is reported hard) 
to get, with supplies likely to be 
affected further by the continued) 
coal strike. Doll manufacturers 
have their troubles in obtaining 
textiles and starch. 





GENERAL MERCHANDISE— 
Stocks 


known MIRRORS, plate 
Conti-ipi, 3. wed 


MIXERS, ovens, slicers, com 


white 


Stendard Lines & Surplus Stocks 
M.A. Raymond. 1265 er Mo 4-191 


specifications (TIES, cam offer large quantity of ary- 


mouth 


| Manufacturers’ Representative 


for Mechanical Products 


Available for Ne. Ulinols and Wis- 
consin for manefacturer requiring 
competent Sales Engineer. Write 


Z 3015 Times 


RESPONSIBLE MILL 
53” DRAPER AUTOMATICS 

COMMISSION WEAVING 
ON RAYON FABRICS 


Efficient of Good Gay 
BOX 489-1474 B'WAY, N.Y. 18 


GENERAL MERCHANDISE— 
yi 


| ee tes he ee 
a Ti ees —— 


Se 


acet 


coened used, manic Ges; teal tee ee 


bye 
URIBE, le-roce. 


2 WwW AT St. 


COs mer mel pak eae 
enir—ena Sader, wt Bt ene eras. 


tone-coa 


ct 


all types 
KNITTED 
ted 
* u 


wover 
Luze Trim, 330 6 Av. 


reguiar lengths 4”, 1 
santity. iawn Wood! oo. ia 


‘ Socn, Loce CH $1 | 
ke ei 
eM TC, 


% table + 


the __ MU £98; ier 
‘a = lll 17 J, 


P1083 | 55) 


iG wed, in 
* eemaltevesochitens el 
wer elie D. cos x : die 


REMNANTS—POUNDS 


fe eee 
pletures, 
cards wanted 


FOR EXCHANGE 1 
CAVALRY twille te «xchange for rayon 


> _§-<81! 
acetate umtnge also ae 
eating and taff linings for), 
yt int E y 9s") 
=r “3 


“ 
ie 


s wanted 
. i 


: suitable for women's sportswear RGE QU 


Ba ried oa 
P CUT & SMOOTH. BOX 
pisisch) 


riced 
- 
, oe aA . at cost. 


prices. LO 


se eat 


s. rings Spatelaines Te "ESC seweiry Co, 
Fm st a et 
A a 


emblem, 
to 


ave 
i] 


w, pins, ear- 


GRIFFIN COMPANIES, 80 Franklin, NY. 


Live-buys new accoun 
ye’. misses ‘s 


IMMEDIATE DELIVERY 
oe 


ered ts "*. 
bo children gut eweaters aoe 
by mfr now expanding WA 9-sa57, 
WOOLENS 
LL COLbRE; 
BOVER 


white; 4”, %”. %”. 
. Sarter 


32 W)%", 3 yd hanks. W118 


a “wor 7 
dely, 200.000 Ibe different counts idesir 
to buyers for foreign firms. : 
) woolens cloth, 100% pew wool, 7 
41” wide. BLP ounces, 0D color, quan- low Srime 
‘ worsied doth, te 
. daly offered to 
ry ag ~-- Saline 
th eptire fot 480 Ono rds National lets: fae ee 
: 7 ¥, 
ag NN ae 
others. J. lL. 


fore 


woolens. 

Bway. 

A ey teal. 13 pieces luz cell $1.95 
or phone. 

Freeman St, ; 

Yayon or wool 


; Bese f 


se Ib, 3 tone Jef 5 


all , SR aaa 
eee ee PLASTIC PATENT LEATRER times 
buyers f0f |step-ladders, IMMED au tam On Eucnossky A CARD 


aio MLBCTRIO ell ents trate 
ee Set ee 
Sete “ry 


LO. 


firsts, a oe 
yards DOWELS, 100,000 W’ and Wee” te or MOCCAS ae i passenger 
n, oF : woven any us 
SY Polonaise et ale ag athe ee 2 tia Bn Ce 
RINKING ci $ | . ., * 
del. 1171 By MU . 887 Bway 


hold uses. ‘ ton; 000 
wot: PADLOCKS, | flashlight batteries, vabter| Op nates: cise S516 vers 2-cunse 
cue Y. a ‘rayon ‘1 NS/ phone CA & ce t 
MAN. Times, _ Pires Uke our smoking ¥ . 
“ .., ELASTIC; uncovered néoprene, 4”, ce ha anda LENG ri 
May teu aie ye wee 1 siteg, sdeorens, YF Excel ! Sones, elivery| EXTRA QUA TY GASOLINE RUBBER 


Bway, NYC. |HOSE 


oe a& F Dig 


q Y several 

St hundred grees, periectiy suited for ex- 
82. per ares, FOR NY. FioMs 
Downtown 


R. 


LA! te 
} Ties. 


a 
clear; . 


qua: 
thet Co 
i . . row 
y, 1176 Bwa CT 7-114 position, reciprocating switches. 16 am- 
tues marr a "t a 
onl 


peres . handles attached, dose 
a “Uksie Eiko a Var aig 


peda Sear 


wk 
> a 
trimmings. ang 
. WI 7-014. 
imme 


shirts, bathing quan 


=“ Ww 
Ry Ae 


& Sons, 


wither he ine 


sien 


wo A. 

Rua A 

ey ee 
F 





REAL ESTATE—BUSINESS 


L r 


45 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946. REAL ESTATE 


SPA DELAY SCORED Appointed Head Beyer \QPERATORS RESELL (May 1 Moving Activity 50% of 1941; APARTMENT BOUGHT| Mansfactoers Acanie INVESTOR IS BUYER 


Building on East 53d St. 


ONRAYONSET-ASIDE <8" BRONX APARTMENT) Business Transfers Ahead of Schedule QNRIVERSIDEDRIVE) yx suncce-s vox. ON LEXINGTON AYE. 


_ 
manufacturers of mattresses, 
| 


| A wartime casualty, the tradi-| pany, which has warned customers bought for occupancy the six- 


; ; , , iNdi i Corner of 85th Street in First 
Slow-Down of Women's and 51-Family Inverurie Court on'tional May 1 moving day this year|to inquire whether they could get Corner Building Brings Cash story building ons pot Bt. oie Ss 
Children’s Wear on Failure to Sedgwick Ave. in Deal— [shows even less activity than it telephone service at @ new address) Over $210,000 Mortgages - | Sale in 37 Years—Other 


| did Jast year, moving men and pub pee Sey Eee, aoe = Le ne BF ge ar Deal East Sid 
: ast year, ; ~ fewest number of changes in sev- pie j . sessed at $90,000, was pur- eais on Ca Ge 
Act on Hardship Cases Seen : * ' Other Transactions lic utility groups reported yester-\era) years. For the period April Deal on Eighth Ave chased from Julia H. Manges 
qpasenedecmespenss _--_—__--- ‘day. At its peak in 1941 the 15 to May 15 it has scheduled! Ser oe sa The oneness cone go | 
4 ‘ »., Spring moving dropped off during 4,400 changes for the entire city, ! | ings took a mortgage 0 ‘VOV, | In the first change of owner- 
Delay by Civilian Production ; 5 Inverurie Court, fifty-one-family the war years becnuee of lack of| compared with 5,758 last year. The bay nage = goers oe which was arranged by Culver, ship in taiet-boven vears, the 
Administration officials in coming _- Sree } apartment house at 2251 nevi’ available renting space, the man-|highest figure for the period was %* verases vy GC *| Hollyday & Co., the brokers, property at 1963-70 Lexington 
is & Sees Guanes mae - “ 5, |Avenue, northeast corner of 183d 1.6, shortage and transportation 11,369 in 1941. This year’s figures southeast corner of 161st Street.) ...4 Lawrence, Blake & Jewell, | : t 
of that to be ed! a Fs) Street, the Bronx, which they a@c- ©. -eaiments. as broken down by boroughs fol- has been sold by Colonial Apart-| Inc. The seller was represented }Avenue, at the northwest corner 
Sages <a SSP peng ees F Pay Dy quired about ten days ago, have During the war years, too, ef- low: Manhattan, 3,100; Queens,’ ments, Inc., through Farber-Witt-| by Weil, Gotshal & Manges, and of Eighty-fifth Street, has passed 
for so-called hardship cases has) "He \been sold by A. Ruth & Sons, eorty were made to eliminate the/1,000; Brooklyn, 800; the Bronx, man. Inc.. and Paul P. Zinner,| the buyer by Joseph Spooner. into the hands of an investor, 
interferred seriously with second) 3 |builders and operators, to an in-\,ying residential movings and/300, and Staten Island, 200. ad 4? k t ent pcr. a == |George A. Bowman, Inc., sold this 
quarter deliveries. it was pointed) ; | vesting client of George A. Bow- pave such leases expire in the fall,, The Consolidated Edison Com- associated brokers, for lseven-story apartment building 
out yesterday by rayon fabric man, Inc., broker in the transac-| which permitted the moving men! pany sald the number of requests mortgages amounting to $210,000. BUYERS TO IMPROVE ltor the Guaranty Truét Comnan 
men, and will slow éewn the manu! , ition. The property, assessed at't, utilize their equipment for com-|for meter changes in April was Elmer L, Steinbock was attorney . ‘ P ~e 
, ri i $185,000, was sold subject to & mercial moving during the latter about the same as any other nor- gor the buyer. The building con- WESTCHESTER SITES \** trustee, in conjunction with 
facture of women’s and children’s 4 mortgage of $121,000 held by the part of April. The manpower short-| mal month and was less than half tains fifty-five suites and occupies he j|Punia & Marx, co-brokers. 
apparel for the late summer and \Irving Savings Bank. The building age is now over and there is plenty|the total received during April, a plot 100 by 162 feet. It is re- ] 4} Dreyer & Traub were attorneys 
early fall. lis near the campus of New York at oudipment, but available renting/1941. It reported a total of 19,252 ported to have a rent roll of}, A two-story own A is cen for the purchaser and M. G. Hol- 
Although the matter has been ‘University and is across the street’ space is still scarce, and few com- requests to turn on and turn off snout $41,000. for the Sa Aes oun aoe we asin ae - 4, sah 
from Riverview, a six-story sixty-|panies are changing quarters. |gas and electric meters in Man- been held by one|*! plot on South Fulton: Avenue,istein for the seller. The building 
under consideration for months ; P ging 4 After having y west of South Columbus Avenue.|contaiis six sto two offices 
the trade still does not know if family apartment house which the’ Louis Schramm Jr., director of hattan and the Bronx from Apri! 1 family for about sixty years, the # NY. by the Meta.| pes, 
- ; operators bought last week. the Movers and Warehousemen's to April 27, compared with 25,035 three-story dwelling at 2627 Eighth Mount Vernon, N. ¥., by » 3 and fifteen apartments and oc- 
CPA will finally decide on a fixed Ruderman, Inc., fur dyers, bought Association of Greater New York, requests during the same period 4 venue was bought for cash by an| Plast Company, of = based) cUPies a plot 102.2 by 37 feet. The 
percentage to be set aside for George A. Baraldi, recently elect-|the two-story commercial building described this year’s May 1 moving|last year. investing client of Joseph Schrift, Stein is yoontess. weed A Pras. [assessed valuation is $195,000. 
hardship cases, or whether it will oq vice president of F. R. Tripler at 1414-24 Cromwell Avenue from as “just an ordinary first-of-the-/ Requests for electric meter jawyer, pa ae eg re. D. Cole ‘Mount! An investor represented by Earl 
place a ceiling on the total amount & Co., clothiers and haberdashers, ‘(he Moncel-Cromwell Corporation, month activity.” What commercial changes in Brookiyn and gas and =), City Bank Farmers Trust Ve a4 te a * * property a E. Heyes, lawyer, bought from the 
of rayons which any one company has been named head buyer of the of which Manroe Lepow is presi--movement there was had been/electric meters in Queens during Company sold to a client of Charles ernon ~ ~ ‘on atnoe 1508 Manha Realty Corporation the 
Clothing department, it was an-|dent. The Iding occupies a plot) practically all completed over the the same April 1-27 period this'g vaocaro lawyer, the four-story not chang n . eck’s | {Ve-story building at 48 East Six- 
may be required to deliver for ; ng ates year were 21,001, compared with p-ivate house at 30 Weat Seventy- A square block in yi ded tY-#ixth Street, according to the 
such cases. cement i: $115,000 subject to a first mort- first Street, with @ frontage of —— oe Moat: ove, and| tome Title Guaranty Company. 
To date, a fixed percentage has age of $64,500 held by the New . : =|twenty-one feet. Title was insured Serrent aeeemta mune oahd tet Ben-|2: A- Hartstein was attorney for 


bee I. - Trust Company. The buyer t] uarant the seller and R. L. Lanning was 
n ordered for the low-end cloth TERMINATION TASK ota — pany &.% _ by the Home Title G Yi jamin Gilbert of this city to the! in. broker 
ing program, retail over-the- nten & Company. West-Conn Development Corpora-| pot) Wyckoff, Potter, Hamil- 


counter sales and feminine street The store and apartment build- hich plana to improve the ‘ . > 
IN NEW OWNERSHIP ing at 40 West Fifty-sixth Street, cei write hemae. Charies L.| to" Inc., in conjunction with Fred- 


its own use. Ralph P. Obedin & Co. 
wear, but no seller has been will- were the brokers in the deal. | FOR NEW TAXPAYERS : 
with a frontage of twenty-five feet, | Daymon was the broker. erick Zittell & Sons, sold the two 





ing to make allotments for the full The Bankers Trust Company, as, four-st t h 

amount of the set-aside because he trustee, sold the one-story taxpayer) Taxpayers of one or two stories Irving Honigsberg has purchased was sold by Mrs. Anne R. Greene St. Clair Apartments, Inc., sold 904 Y «3 308 “yy Thirty-th m4 

lacks knowledge of how much ey 5 _ yee Perf co — “Hy are rong <A Street for pred. a. ert 

more would be required to meet Continued From Page 87 vast reet to Leonar feill. . . Fourth Avenue, Brooklyn, contain- & Burke were the brokers. 752. the six-story apartment), 

CC priorities for hardship cases, . - The building contains eight stores "er Of Hillside Avenue and = ing two stores and fourteen apart-- Nehring Brothers sold- for ew fon end garege at Xe te 30 Post ~ a client of Edward M. O. Pratt. 

it was stated. country. Beginning tomorrow approv- and occupies a plot 149 by 100 by land Parkway, at the entrance to Lents from a client of Frederick Lenbob Realty Corporation, repre- Road, Yonkers, to St. Clair Gar- voseph Howard Katz represented 
By the same token, sellers are sab. Sie aay te niablol tuaes 143 feet. H. J, Rogers was the Jamaica Estates, Queens, by T. Beyer, attorney, for cash above a sented by William L. Rosan, laW-! dens, Inc. Title was insured by | the a oe ya oc- 

unable to allot fully the remainder OPA or may be considered approved | broker. Victor Searing, real estate consul- mortgage of $35,460 for ten years yer, to S. W. Steel & Co., the SiX-\the ‘Title Guarantee and Trust! yA sronatees i yy tH 

of their production or inventories if OPA does not act on them withia| Joseph Castle bought the two- tant, who acquired the plot from at 4 per cent. The property is as-\story apartment house with 124) Company. Rinald “ae re 4 on » 110 Bo anne 

commonly known as free goods, ‘2 days. — |family dwelling at 2053 Chatterton Build- 8¢8sed at $42,000. John J. Woodel rooms on the north side of West) ~ tne house at 79 Beech Hill Road, o> ee em wery, 

because. th , | CLOTHING: There were reports) h the Hillside Jamaica Home Bu to th |Inc., the five-story business build- 

, they point out, they do! ourrent here today that OPA will an-| Avenue from E. Sartley throug ine © The plot fronts for “85 the broker. 171st Street, adjacent to the corner) yonkers, was purchased in a cash | ing at that add oceupying s 

not know how much is actually nounce a lberelising price regulation (the P. C. D'Onofrio Company, ing Company. P |_ In a purchase in the Brooklyn of St. Nicholas Avenue, and known) geq) by a client of John G. Schultz) 05 ta et a » r : _#- 

free from priority requirements, [on men's suits. It was expected that|broker, The same broker sold the|103 feet on Hillside Avenue and Heights section, Mr. Honigsbergias 565 West 17ist Street. Irving| company, brokers, from the Do-| 4 *t 34.005. Je - r 
Rayon weavers also expressed the agency would ease its criticized tenement building at 1129 Fteley|154 feet on Midland Parkway. L.'acquired the ten-family remodeled Rappaport was attorney for the! nestic and Foreign Missionary Bo- | her act Ry my oe 3 Franc 


planned for the northwest cor- the four-story building at 5310-12 to a client of Green & Selzer. Horn! /.. cash over a mortgage of $222, 


considerable impatience with the|™#ximum average price order as it| avenue for Sebastian Gorose to Ww. Faber and Louis Diamond were house at 39 Sidney Place from a buyer. . ciety of the Protestant Episcopal, 

Office of Price Administration’s|2PPues fo sults. tate pan Be yp |Lena A. Morelli, who insured title the brokers. client of Bagley“& Protter, attor-| The Bowery Savings Bank sold| church in the United States Taare gs 4 yt bony pat b> the 

eee - — the eae ere. adjustments authorized ad b= the City Title Insurance Alexander E. Frontera sold en ot ard aes pag dey iy nh through John J. an gy Bet | - America. The bp we ae ten” | Fralor Realty Corporation the 

release from ee control of all- ast March. m , 'one- -05 Sixty- 00, w ‘five-story apartmen Trus m e e, 

silk products cmanber which would) APPLIANCES: | Prices consumers The Railroad Federal Savings sinth, Birest, ak c L, as- broker. ~~ |Lanox Avenue. ‘The new owner is a. | muttt-famity. eee Wathen 

be included broad woven silk. ironing machines were increased an/@"d Loan Association sold the sessed at $27,500, to an investor, Five two-family homes at 2038 the 35-37 West 117th Street Cor- 37.5% VALUATION CUT Duncan, broker, according to the 
The high price of silk products average of 1% per cent as the result |two-family house and store at 3577 through Cushman & Wakefield, to 2048 East Twenty-sixth Street poration, represented by Moses\J/ 0/0 City Title Insurance C no. Bad 

is attractive to weavers who feel of an increase of 6.8 per cent simul-|East Tremont Avenue to H. Mit-Inc., brokers. The property is have been purchased by the Cum- Kooperstein, lawyer. ON ‘CO-OP’ APARTMENT no naan A Ran tg 

that the dollar return per loom on canteualy Sivwee ta manutacturery termeier through the Eugene J.'under lease as an A & P Super-berland Investing Corporation from) Harry S. Zorgas sold to Silas —._ X z ie 

silk would justify considerable ef- “S85. “ane textile division .of BUSher Company, also the broker Market for a term of years, Jacob Rodale Homes, Inc. Sale was for and Sylvinia Hardy the eight- apr sa TO EXPAND FELTMAN’S 

fort with the raw staple. Control'cP, said that out of a total of about|in the sale of the three-family Friedland was attorney for the all cash above mortgages to be family building with two stores at| Reductions of 37.5 per cent in| inp iviolaia 

ae wr) Japanese cupply of a iy 400,000,000 yards of rayon tabrie pro-|residence at 415 East 162d Street seller, and Arthur 8. Brothers was pra ony BA my my heme: 531 Lens Avenue, according to oon aamenea varuation aa fit. New Owners Planning Stores 
Inite es yern - duced in the first quarter of thi .¢ yer, tle urance Com . teen coo ve fy | 

cials would appear ‘also to offer a seg yy! 218,b00, 000 were sai ininm Stock. + om a ge oY are oe 9 two-family States. , i E. Hutchinson wes the building at 160 East Seventy-sec- and Trade Exhibits 

guarantee against drastic price“ An: May allocations of lead for! R. EB. Wigham, attorney, sold the houses will be built on the farm| David Cook sold the three-story proker. ond Street for the tax years 1943) i wing the ound et the 

fluctuation which plagued the in-|tetraethyl fluid have been set at|five-story apartment house at 747 facing Juniper Park from Seventy- ae at = — oo > - ~ ——— to 1946 has e, = by Su"! well-known Feltesan’e vestement 

dustry in pre-war days and was a/4,160 tons, which will produce approx- East 181st Street to a client of E.'seventh to Eighty-second Streets, investing client o @ Fran ‘ RESORT LODGE IS SOLD reme Court Justice Aron Ste and amusement center at Coney 


highly important contributory imately 25 per cent less tetraethyl Osborne Smith, Inc. broker Forest Hills West, by the First McCurdy Company, broker. e aggregate assessment was re- 
> \fluid on a quarterly basis th . “» . ’ - " 50,000 to|l#!and by Benno Bechhold, execu- 
factor in the growth of the T8YON used in the first Cearter, CPA wa*| The Home Owners Loan Corpo- Property Corporation which made|_ 4n investing client of the David Camp Near Keene, N. Y., Brings|$1 001,000. Dred yay + tlle tive vice president of the Savoy 


industry, it was pointed out. ‘nounced. ration sold the two-stor e- the purchase from the heirs of the Jaret Company bought the tax- ; : 
eee bo | family dwelling at 866 Eagle Pend original owners. The property is Payer property, 75 by 165 feet, at $19,600 in Auction Here & ry represented the owner, —_ gp A Ha — 

oe ae sar ee ; nue to a client of D. Houlihan & ® long narrow strip running from 2834-40 Church Avenue, | r r the 190 Rast Boventy-escond Street) sae, the Charles . Noyes C 
ARRIVAL OF BUYERS 'Sons, brokers Seveaty-ceventh Street, to Dey|__Jeeene Caflere, seid, the twe,| Hurricane Lodge the 240-<are) Corporation pany, Inc, la studying various pos 

, Samuel Hurwitz reports that he Harbor Road. John J. Droesch family dwelling at 7205 Narrows 4 dirondack camp two miles from} Justice Steuer ordered reduc-\).) te ype = + Some 
Arriving buyers may register in this column by telephoning LAckawanna 4-1000 ‘had purchased the five-family Ws the broker, Walter T. Wag- Avenue to Boleslaw Gutowski Keene, N. Y¥., went to Jacob Silver-| tions of 22.7 per > “ok hiditions and pe: chee nan ~ oo 
7 , ial Ity Com- ow Se | t oyal, een- > on- 
Continued From Page 43 PO RTD Holden & Stone Co.; Mim K. C ae 1045 Morris Avenue from the Lo ay yy ng pny tonty oy itis Tasevanne man for $19,600 at an auction con-| Mery car elena apartment/"ection with additions and im- 
: Jr., mase Ls house dresses, children ‘Ida vt oh ahr chaser. Company insured the title. ducted yesterday by Stephen A./notel at 23 West Seventy-third|Provements planned by the new 
fants’ wear: Miss A. Herwald. women's ho-, a children’s 3 : 


siery, Miss T. E. Streem, neckwear, handker-| ¥**! A. Shellhammer, teens’ shop, chase money mortgage of $5,000. | Reswick & Avrutis, attorneys, | . McDonald, vice president of Joseph| Street, for 1943-45. The values Owners. 


chiefs, scary ° daytime 4 > Vv treet 1,600,000 to| Barr, Bennett & Fullen were the 
LOS ANGELED May Co! rity men's sports- SCHENECTADY 8. Berney Co.; Mrs, M. Peter DiPaola bought the four-| purchased Ser ent Same STG AUCTION HOME COLONY |P. Dey, inc, The] bin ay — ee en ead and ool adteenene for Charles L. and Al- 
wear, Miss G. Wise, house Greases, maternity TsiehOfemnw Bros Co: P. vere, StOry tenement building, also con-|Belleaire Park Realty Corporation | - salesrooms. a, hy { ‘ne7 1944-45. S. Herbert\fred F. Feltman, sons of the 
Suite Son ewoar  afnten, Dlouses, bathing" basment mdse, mgr. : resow'® taining t the southeast corner of Jamaica’ ‘ with furnishings, includes a main) $1,227,000 for — = i ; ; 
Suits, sportawear, Mise H. Atkins, lingerie. weTeRTOWNCE k Em & Ce! Mis 4 ning two stores, at 507 East) Bell J. P. Day, Inc., to Sell Dwellings lodge, dining hall, thirteen cot-|Retisner, president of the 5. H. | founder, and Charles A. Feltman, 
McDonald. ribbons, woolens, “A saeiiy wees ereeeell ; Miss A-'185th Street from Anne M. Egan. Avenue and 211th Street, Belle- ones : ‘ estate|son of Charles L. Feltman, in the 
Bees ens Co ten tonva, LaSktOn. isses’ WORCESTER I" G. Gnctunes Co.: D. & Bul-| The City Title Insurance Gum aire, Queens. The property is im-| and Lots on Long Island tages, nine-hole golf ae , tennis pionnee mane, was real aie’ Gres tee a 
avieen & Rosenberg, | "| Mites, upholstery, curtains,. gifts, lamps. "| d with a one-story buildi —e courts and swimming pool. expert for the owner. |sale. Lavan 
M prove ne-stor n 
POR ———— Mah rerrwcy Soy 9 2 gg C. Well, Ine., 101 W. aist. |paay ee ae \cnder lease to the Hoffman Bev Twenty-one furnished homes other parcels to go at the auc-| Reductions of $582,000, or 16.3 suppeneases the purchasers in the 
¥ ‘erage Company, and two gasoline 4nd sixty-nine building sites on'tion were: three four-story tene-|per cent of the total assessed val. ansaction. 


Lucenemmsnsnamemmamumemmament | CRRA LIER RERRERRTROUREROTRE 4 Gnee... .caunenesencosesesuerntennenneesnenenasatipennt > 


CLEVELAND—May Co; Miss G. Barker, in- PEADING-—C. K. Whitner Co; J. B. Mercer 


ju vVecowweceeewoew ee! | bincsssessbesmneceneend 


= 


Te 


ready- | BALTIMORE—Blum's, Inc.: 


te-wear iC. L. Bowen, cur-! 

IRWIN! Pa—Kaplan's: Me. Colter, ready-to-) fink, Qpbgimery. domeitics area” fabrics. NEWBURGH BUILDING SOLD ~ ten 
wear eyers., ® apparel; Miss J Peconic Bay, which comprise -65 Avenue B, Manhat-)uations, for the tax years 

NEW HAVEN—Style Frock Shop; W. Goldmen.| firnityre Santss children's weer, juvenile) _ oo ey See Way aye Beixedon Estates, a residential egy = eo! Moss for $25,375;|on the sixteen-story and penthouse!  Beldock Buying for Client 
RR OND-Newman's; D. Brown, ready-to- | Divan boys mene clething rig 2 (Print Cloth Cempany Plans to! naee peepee jcolony on Route 25, Jericho Tura-|the five-story tenement with storesjapartment house at 32-42 West} In signing a contract for pur- 
WASHINGTON—Loed Co.: Mrs. L. Bergazine, (PAST LIVERPOOL, Onio—a. J, Olsen Co.:| Expand Operations N. J. STORE GROUP SOLD ipike, Southold, L. I, will be of-!on the southwest corner of Fifth|Seventy-seventh Street also has) nase off the former DeKoven 
ready-to-wear Fee Pes eee ot paler. ats | ~e ode fered at auction at the property! avenue and West 115th Street to|been ordered by Justice Steuer. rosigence at 1025 Park Avenue 
_ieeicerver, Werring & Howell, 225 W. 34th. | men's wear.” ; kL. “| The Cevaalaraninan — a on Saturday by Joseph P. Day, Inc.| james Leff for $18,500; the four-|Eugene R, Hagemeyer and Robert) George J. Beldock. former District 
PeING GREEN. Ohlo-Gam Pushin Co.; A. NEW ORLEANS—Leon Godchaux Clothing Co., “|Holding Co. Gets Building on; The one and two-story dwell- story tenement and store on the| Bastian Jr., head of the appraisal Attorney of Kings County, was 


wea 


CAMBRIDGE, Mase—J. Corcoran Co: Mrs. OKLAMOMA’ CHP dey Bt BE sigs pn Bt 54-70 Liberty Street, New- if ontaining from two to six department of Slawson & Hobbs, 
D Wood, : - @, ©. \burgh, N. Y., was d Hudson Boulevard ngs con 8 southeast corner of Brook Avenue) depa acting for a client, the S. L G, 
- égametics. Mise’ B. Whelan. |WARHINGTON OS "ikann Gone Co: i ens. |Snereen Properties, agg ed aacteminanaed |bedrooms are directly vn and ad-\.44 East 158th Street, in the|teatified ds real estate experts for|piaity Corporation, Beldock & 


reen, men's boys’ furnishings, stein, mdse. mgr., ready-to-wear: J, B. Mo-| P , jacent to the bay, as are the va | al from Colum-|the realtor, the City Bank Farmers) , “ 

CANTON. "Ohio-Bitanger ‘D.'G. Co; Mc m.| SACHEM. hosiery,” knit underwear [pingers Falls. The building, with| Teking back @ purchase-money wart sites which also front on in-| BTR: a ton si 250, and the|Trust Company, as trustee of New |, + attorneys for the. pur 

etbins. deapesien teas coven” ¢ Yahr-Donen Corp., 225 W. S4tb an area of 81,000 square feet, will|)mortgage for $35,000 for three lets from the bay he say |O1* University for eg Tth\York Title and Mortgage Com-| asing group, explained yester- 

BOLYOKE. Mase —d -pieiser & Co; Miss 3. BREVARD, 8. C.—Patterson's; Mr. Fatterson, be occupied by Hand Prints, Inc.,| years at 4 per cent, the Downtown) com seneete. thet taane than |£oUr-family house at 127 Bay 17th soe i nolo J \day, The purchase price of the 

LANCastEs Fe— rote & Shona: P. watt. / AE cane ees: argos, Arecnes a textile screen printing concern | Corporation of Jersey City sold the|s00 requests for literature on the| Street, ww to Joseph Zim-|P Nasties Charles B McLaughlin | Sroperty, ena into thirteen 
hd . . : . a . 4 . 

oF at ea mt pe RR me tablecloths two-story store building at 2865-| properties to be offered have been ee oe ordered reductions of 7 to 13 per) . Se, wan Seperves 


GFRINGHIELD a" Sree Co.: A. Cohen,|\YORE” Pa~Charies Wochberger, ehildren's| With & plant in Wappingers Falls, |as about $200,000. Levien, Singer 


coats, dresses, smallwares: Miss B. Dpure. weer. 67 Hudson Boulevard, Jersey|received from all five hborougns| cent for the years 1941 to 1945, in-| ¢ Neuburger 
potiane: Mrs M. Fitzpattick. gloves: “Mrs UNCLASSIFIED Bey ya ~ € wenscen pin, toe | City, assessed at $73,650, to the/and from Westchester County and| REAL ESTATE NOTES  |ciusive, on the nineteen-story ‘and| the p elling in [soars attorneys for 
ie cyuen'e oan Le lingerie, Sete: As “Patamounte ated rts. | nat it will sedan abent Raannae Sanford Holding Company for an New Jereey. ne nee ry we Bang Bg . ; 
as t ° ou aprons, y 7 . “ ’ ’ | _—- Ce = - . 
wiksisee eta itme, mince, ates | "icenna unaeeer‘baligea: “ish wesy YAFG@ of printed tablecloths a year, |Mdicated consideration of $100,000. | The H. D. Leds Company has| i334) er Mandel, president of Ab-| ,,onducted tours available to men 
forth, sportswrar, Jewelry, handbags, iinserie BOSTON_R. Wh! : It is expected that the Newburgh| Se Gen Real Betate Bean ge Mrs. R. R. Young Buys Farm opened its new real estate office at hott & 4 . seal estate ex-\.34 of Switzerland, Norway, 
Mutnal Buying Syndicate, 11 W. 424. abo nega. jeweiry B.” Meister aver: [Plant will be in operation in July | Ine» Fn Ragin oy amen, A -_ 4 NEWPORT, 2 Be April 30— 10 Rockefeller Plaza. Sort fas ae athe \Cemmanes ane — meee — 
a . ~| Mrs. Robert R. Young of New Yor The directors of the Midtown 2 eo tails at Army Recrui 


ALBANY—wW. M Whitney Co N. Murphy,| ware; E. Thom " ces, trimmings; Mr or August. conc _ aS SS 
1. boys’ wear | B ' Mr McElroy, housewares; 128) ous ADS 12 Westervelt Place, Jersey City, .44 this city has entered into &@ Reality Owners Association, at DESIGNER ADDS SPACE ing Stations. Apply now. 


TON, W. Va —Peoples Sto 
ples Store |from the Washington Building and tract for the purchase of thé their monthly meeting yesterday, 


children's wears ts Eble infants. ‘ot bth Ave ty. Mantle) 1 Approve Resort Hotel Sale Lo dissoluti 
women's wear.’ —, en oe): an Association, in dissolution. . at 
CHENGS TG vase: 3. m. mngton, meee | Caethe pase eae: MS. © Siiagkte’ SM] Albert M. Greenfield, president| “The Joseph J. Garibaldi Organ-/42-ecre Anthony farm on Es gove the seticing preaiant, + FI séth| {( LOST AND FOUND 
mer. furs dresses men's dresses: H. Krass, sportewear. H. K : |/Main Road, Portsmouth, R. L er cker, a gold pen and pencil set Teague Takes a oor on 
CLEVELAND—Wm. Taylor Sons Co.: G. Shuler, Farrell, asst ece 3 Son Madison Ave of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Com- | ization, brokers, reported two lans for use of the pro rty were a ’ bossed ll contal j 
floor “coverings” Mr. G Arndt. daytime CHICAGO—Goldblatt Aros. M. Millman, mase.|Pany of Atlantic City, N. J., an-|Union City transactions. The two-|? anc an om eero ning Street for Expansion Lost 
Gann gcegmen's secessoriea: | mer. russ, jampe, electrical spplianess. fr-/nounced that a special meeting of|family house at 117 Forty-seventh|"°t Tevealed. Mr. and Mrs. Young a regolution of the directora on his ASE, taut, 
aton, junior dresses niture . Tuteer, rugs, ges Gra- ~ g oO | amily se y ‘are arriving soon to occupy Fair- more than ten years of service Walter Dorwin Teague designer on ene peak Tuesday event 


M 4 
DETROIT—Crowle : | . lf. . ; : ‘ - | 
M. Pollegk, men f, Sites Frock: | ELMina—Rabyiand “Kiddie ‘Shop. F Preis. terday aperowed ta alpha, you |Street was sold for the Stellsincine, their gimmer residence! 4 rter more then thirty years atiof industrial prodycts, has leased) ing: contained sonal peers. wwerd 


Galentin, junior colony, ready-to-wear, accessories. e sale of the Realty Company, Inc., of Union inesingte a if returned to ' . 
a Gilbert, dresses: °C. DENVER ~ Prana’ & rancis Petz-Cariton Hotel at Atlantic|City to John Hansen. The agency's, 103 Park Avenue, Louis Kramer) the ee ae woe | Sn Tan “Aicways Agency, Inc., o av. 
wees iiss A. Rubinstein. sportswear men’ ' Bing "|\City to John A. May of Glovers- mortgage department arranged a BUILDING PLANS FILED has moved his real estate office to) square fee Geen. th h he, BEAWN en 
i Chee eae. Ee; Shines tas bth avc* dpeny clothing. | ville, N. ¥., for $2,250,000 in cash. veteran's mortgage loan for the monoommaquinaties 4 East Forty-third Street. Pifty-fifth t. roug tm thy t Ay, 


._ Tuesday, Madison 
lg mend “**| Net proceeds of the sale, less com- purchaser. The same brokers sold, Sestatinn The Long Island State Park|Cross & Brown Company, broker. Morel rewesd. Con Tetecanter 6-608, 


kK 

PITTSBURGH—Boggs & Buhl; Mrs. Riddle, ing Service) 
better 4 } a ‘ 

PORTLAND. Me—Porteous Mitchell & Brayn: | “thoes hosiery: 456. feb Ae teoar “anes: mission and other expenses, will|the six-room house at 109 Thirty-\Tentn ave, 452-60. new office and showroom|Commission has awarded the con-| The space will be used for a model! casei sone booth, 
Mra C4. Chapman. gifts: Miss M. E. Me-| | ciates) yield in liquidation about $60 a third Street by Mary Diedrich to building: Bert Lane, genet arthur Welser,| tract for constructing a sand dune|shop, development laboratory, ma- Grand Contenl Terminal, 1 choc. Apr 
Moors. draperies: ' Miss D> ‘O'Hare porte “ietaky, man's “Sothing. forsichines is" sth share, he declared. ‘an investor. 16th St. 349 Bnew garage building: Charies at the Gilgo State Park in Suffolk|chine shop and reception and con- a <— 3 rp, with name 
wear, skirts. house dresses: Mrs. E. Walton. Ave. (M { Service). | | Salomone, ; Anthony M. De Rose, County to Gibson & Cushman of|ference room. The Teague organi- Ross McMaster: finder kindly com- 


B.C. Buyin 
mor MH G iy : | ee!" re t. $9,000. | 
ROCHESTER—McCurdy 4 C oe M w gy Pa cilezan's \Corane “ eX. oe erin Bik! «: Bay Shore, on a bid of $52,125,/zation will continue to occupy) He a Ee —— 2 


: : & Co rm L eves . « ’ - om | 
aallegraenleptti meter © 27 Ba peice Bacneeeic MANHATTAN TRANSFERS it Ste ng |eecaring, to Brown's Letters, Inca] reteith the apace there ferieeriy| Coir Suite" rai toa ia 


~. 
bl” 


*a5i*She"3"h 


aS Bs 


ted 
= 


. detweea 
Tie Build- 


mB. : Hevt Ee at Civ an , - 
S he" Bas a" SE" sah’ SK 


SD. between 10-6 P M._ 
Pe 


‘3 ‘ahi 


maz 


. 
4 


Pee er 


Saye! 
a he! 


ROCHESTER—McCurdy & Co: M. E: to alter multiple dwelling: | 
mt ae ’ O; ME. Tatetbomm,| Deane, es Somer Ascoet | Se ee multiple flim ¥ construction reports. davein t Iabora-| Municate with LO 3-ss70 
: : , 000 ——— > +--+ used for the deve ent la 7) 
ST. PAUL—The Emporium: D. M. Loughlin,, stationery, typewriters; basement, I. & | | Staab. Fe Tinks “Qwelling: Biiea-| t Aditi | i veiry 
st eis, aidinten tatiee | Lampie, boys’, men's clothing, furnishings; Sth St, 365-367 HE. S0x99.11: Herbel Realty 62d St, 355 E, 16x1005: Irma Lucchesi to wot he wher; melden MeLaughiin a! SALE ON GRAMERCY PARK tory being conv as _ ag et 
cae eee — J ree ki C.F.) i | Corp (Harris Rifkin. pres) to 320 Cherry; & A. Gorga, Inc, 118 EB 61 St: mtg $4,728; | A tes, architects; cost, $9,800 | business offices. ning, April a H Theatre: re- 
nee ; 4 ~ , , ucchini, MILWAUKEE—Belin Garment Co.; L. J. Belin,| St alty Cop. 165 E St ($1.65). | $8.80), | svn be id E: to alter business building: | der ees areal Oth ercial leases -~ ward. Return to Back, Starr & Gorham 
ment coats, sults, dresses | nr foods Lincoln. Sth St, 20 W. 20x1005; Ca-d'Oro Realty|Cliff St 42-44. Si.2x68.2xirreg: The Socatean|*'5S Oh goo (PME Hans N. Wor- er comm repo Ay : 
National Dept. Stores, 112 W 8th NNEAPOLIS—Brown Clothing Co.; E Brown, | Gor (J. Homer Butler, pres) to J. Homer; Corp (Henry Munroe. pres) to Harry Casper,| oi tin ttect: cost, $30,000 : ‘Buyer of House Gets a Key to\ed yesterday included: d@ia- 
CLEVELAND—Bailey Co: Miss F. Feinstein, ™2'®. boys’ clothing, furnishings; 175 Sth| ier, 4 W 86th St, and another ($21.45), | 415 9 St. Bkiyn: (835.75): sam oty, | 9 mene. Se ee uitisic éweilin y y ~~ aftarneen 0. bet 41-58 
clave ‘I whMndOin Fa Mary Mee: 'b Am4 | Peter “a ber ie B hye ton aay sipasse® ences. and td Ciarke Smith, owner: Kok! a Simon Private Park — Grime Eatornationsl Corp, euporter, Sts, in or wy dison and 4 Avs, 
EVELAND—Balley Co; Mies R. Kay, gloves: : , ur, me . + SrConlza, | , 108. , ' .|_ architect; cost, $8,000 : " ag in 5 ! fo _ 
D. Kroesen, dom ‘| hosiery, underwear; W. Sist (8. Moff-| and another ($2.25 24 Ave, 192. n e cor i2th St (301 E), 17.3578; ; at —— St; Ferry y ’ n Wow oa 
MEMPLIS try Disc ahere ag gy man) *b Ave, 507-508, n w cor of 38th St, 49.5x100;| Meyer Alterman, referee to Dry Dock fav-| Broadway, 1237-99, ine ave of pe to Douglas L. Elliman & Co. has : Laventhal & Hrematetn co tt gp RB ~® —f- -— 
costs. suite furs . ‘| NEW HAVEN—Elaine’s; Miss Ginsburg. hosiery, enry A. Thell m (referee) to igrant! —— Instn; cons 81,000 (foreclosure): Realty Core, owner: Poul Chapman, areni-| g " le . cree ts, Dranch o , w. a. Fi ee 
PITTSBURGH—Fronk & Seder: HM Seder,| prriaxit in Vondeg abo ee eetman | Speustrial Savings Rank; coms 61,000 (lere-| ($330) tect; cost, $4,000, sold to a client the five-story ‘Mew seh atcCobman a Gold EAR eqatee, 
coats. suits: Miss E. McLaughiin, neckwear. PEEKSKILL—Vandom Shoppe: B. Bernstein,| closure) ($3.30) ‘Hudson St. 552-554, n e cor Perry St (101), ; ’ ©  wiseead *~ mn fl | : ¥ A 3 oon rm. 
age a es +4 T. Cohen, men's furnish- i me ee ee eel be ‘a rm. ek a st Getlivtad eee) te hedeam Realte’ Coup % Murdock Ave, ¢ 6, 100 ft s of Edenwald ave, dwelling, on a plot 26 by 105 feet, "ii . store & | central, or on train. Reward. Keo 
a yd Leventon. handbags PHILADELPHIA—Lee’s Hosiery Shy (tenants by entirety) | Grove St: p_m_ mtg $29,000: ($4200). 18x44; to erect 3-story dwelling; Mac and cash|W 17th St. a M-| Rochelle 2-366. - —_ 
ah Ea «pe boyt’ @ftiitick. \" Benard, ready-to-wear, spertswear, Rngerie:|1394 Bt as We 39 bxoe 11; Marie L. Evans, |1i0th St. 128’ 25x160 11. Abbie J Ketcham to| Flora. Hirschoff, owners, Prank J. Ross, t 21 Gramercy Park, in @ Hazelkorn, ‘lofts. in 876 Broadway. | Beas _ between Piashing. Fens 
ns.) 421 7th Ave. (H. Miller) | adm Samuel 1. Evans. to Marie L. Evans,, Wm, Striar, 202-01 Sth Ave, Bayside, Queens; yates Ave. es. 200 tt n of Nett! Ave, 4g.axas; (transaction for Charlotte Harding oan, ore 8 PO ed m0 jon and Radio City; reward. 


i 4 am 
ings, women's sportswear; &. Schwartz 248 ect 
| " ‘| PHILADELPHIA—Mar! ome } w St; 7.4 ( : | 
Miss 4 Kichaein sess" Simpeon. ree: Mirets, domestice, 490 Tth Aves ( has Asso 107th Bi, 0p. 408, $08, ‘106x100 11° Jerome Berman 110th St, je &. gue. 11; _crentoré Realty to a Sater? éveilin ; Rosalie conde. 'Conrad of Inverness, Scotland, ep: Saas Mail & a Co, LADY'S leather Waa, lost In taal Senday 
basement mdse. m ‘ "| elates) | to Sadie . 2486 Devoe Terrace (a | er einberg, Ue ’ ; ; ' ’ , ~ money and pin im- 
Sthecttonme Gels @ Mite, hw PITTSBURGH—Keutmann t) Ketcham, Moody, Pe. ‘quit claim ; (BBE). and MacIntosh Kellogg of New i. Se. poante R 
r _— 


. c int). |, $4 
- 8S. Suserman, P. Bough, Barish, mdse.|Ave of the Americas, 579, 23x75; Virginia L Pauline W, Paulding Ave, ws, } att af of Neill ave 
ae i ye By Be’ ne | mars; L. Bnyder, men's’ work clothes: Mi | Abbott to Judlin Resity Corp, ii W 424 Bt: &. Hammel, #14 each; to erect four a-story dwellings: | York, trustees under the will of 
° " " } 


= ities 
es. les rik Johnson. owner; Raiph J. Marz, archi- G Bigel 
Gresses. costs, suits » sport clothes, sweaters; J. Lucas, m mtg $15,000 ; . c tect: ‘cost, $57,500. | race Bigelow. Buys in Port Washington 
HAGERSTOWN. Ma -—Rarles Dept. Stores: 8 ping: Roott, children s | sn | aahae ates, 17 auto 11: Rrnest x to Mrude Niet, preet to Lontne tne, 5ab°W asd Bronadale Ave. e 6, 925.2 ft » of Van Nest| The house faces Gramercy Park ys 2 tom 
Linsner, gem, mdse.; 8. Jacobs, coats, suits, [10 B, Rdmundeon, asst. millinery: Miss F a, Tae. He Mepenons Hh, Breouye| Me mtg 422.400; pm mq stitd: thay), | Ave: to alter ~stoiy laundry; Sebuyler Amer | and adjoins the corner of Irving The Port Washington, L. L,, 
Nar, Mist J.” Youngs knit| Amsterdam Ave, 1297, 262100; Henry O. Mave-|Park Ave, 381-383, ne cor B34 Bt (101-108 B),| ‘can Steam Laundry, Inc, owners, Henry payer at 72-90 Main Street, a two- 
JACKSON, Tenn.—Grand Leaéer; H. Lindy, : senderg, men's hate: Mrs | meyer and another, trustees for Emilie Best; 100.8x18): Manufacturers Trust Co, trustee. to, Nordheim, architect; cost, $6,000 Place, and its ownership includes 5 and basement building con- 
NASHVILLE Tenn.—National Stores Corp.: F | M. Maile, vendome RAK Ne | will of Nathalie Mayer, to 1297 Amsterdam Seibet nohe bi tee One tel bans eum ©, mm a key to the private park. The tal twelve stores and six bow!l- 
L Smith, gen. mdse: B. W. Potts, gen. mdse. PISTSBURGH—Gimbdel — Bros.; ive, | Corp, S38 Sth Ave; p m mtg $15,500; cons ; ; one Surf Ave, 1223-31: l-story storage and lockers: | 441) resented by Nevius, - 
SPRINGFIELD. Tenn Randolph House & Cos, Rubenstein, men's underwear, ry, abirte: | $20,000 ($23) peers New St, 42-44, 49 ones quirres: David Rapoport A. H. & J. Amusement Corp, owner, Michael S¢Uer Was rep ing al with offices on the sec- 
Z - —— xg A ile M McGowan,’ women's undérwear, bai ae frirres. Charles #" Noyes to 9 Plott hi tno, mtg. $34,008, = ate $26,913: (STS.08).| a enrte, Oremitect: com S85, ‘Brett and Kellog; Ur-| ond floor, was purchased by Fred- 
WASHINGTON Wahl's | Dest, Store: B.| 3 Eustbeum: Gripe monarion, coameties i. | Realty Corp, $1 Chambers St: pm mts 34 St. 246 E. le axtil: Harry Peibel to ite. Mgnarichsun St. 1816 to Isis: Lineteen 2-07 chaser by Choate, Mitchell and Ely. erick Brown, operator, from ©. & 
Suiaatn gisis’ weer Block, asst. drugs, sundries, cosmetics, 116 AE rnd Corp Vien nae prooerty.? i. 2 | pe fe ' 1¢ aces i ate & 062; 2m owner Samuel Malkind, architect; cost ———— + J. Milgrim Daniel Brener was the 
ho | me | $285, ° \. 
scenes ye .~ bes ~ * “i PITTSBURGH—Jonasson's; Miss E. Baque, cemee. Crown St, Brooklyn, et al mts 00g Mt, 248 E. oo BI Rasty Peival te ones Ave %, 2801-223; also 2672 to 2056 « 20m wt:) TRANSFERS IN THE BRONX broker. The property is opposite! I 
ready-to-wear aaa . ye y+ a a yl stern 144, Bway. (Specialty New St, 42-44, 49.9x48.4xirreg: Hada Realty.) ano. mt 3h 003 pm mt $1 000 ($2.75) tyemsy a Ey Ry noun — the Long Island Hpilroad station. | came sapphires, about 45 points eich: 
INDIANAPOLIS—Hollywood Dress Shop; D. PITTSTON, Pa.—Rosedell Dress Shop; Mr, ‘'9¢, (David Rapoport, pres) to David Rapo- 9th Ave, S28: mn @ cor 18th St (361-383 W). architects: cost $230,000 ; | qunnintnll a tS lost im midtown Manhattan. April 20. 
Spiege!. ready-to-wear Post, ready-to-wear, accessories, sportswear, Prt. 167-15 43 ve, Flushing, L. 1. & ano;| 29.1080: 129 oth Ave Corp (C. Leo Calarco. Tth St, B. 2490 to 3486: twelve }-atory 2-family Burnside Av, 1990 (11-2815); Louls Peck to Phone O'Connell, Ct 
MIDDLETOWN, Conn.—M. Feinberg, ready-to- 450 Tth Ave. (Beidmer & Lagdres) san? Py AY sennne.0: Recor A. Lew nest) to Thyra 3. Winslow, 7 Park Av@ "Gweilings: Jack Match, owner: Seelig & Fin- Hee 4 com 2032 Valentine Ave; ial Dyckman St. Pa 1 Purchased : sP OM 
wear UINCY, Mass.--B ° , 48- ' ager f , , phos le [ ; : ree ewes ce 
PHILADELPHIA—N Bomar, ready-to-wear ee notions, {pul goods, books, etattonsey, | Se SE EY, mie Inc, 228 Broad-'eoq St, 231 —, 17.10n82.10, Elsie T. Adler to Court Bt, "yoo ae aller faerr restaurant; 4 Oy Be 2.9 } Me os | Joseph L. Ennis & Co., opera- 
WASHINGTON—RBlechman's A, we N cosmetics, 39 W. 34 Helen Flint, 228 E 624 St; mtg $i, Grace M. Mangano, owner: Caflero & Lac-| Rroedwes’ tors, have sold the two-story busi- 


N . . : ; Went End Ave. 496, 2n100: Sallie Williams to 
Stomunan ready-to-wear ky. coats ROCKY MOUNT, Wa.—I. Dewvidson, ary goods Dorothy sBehotcket, 348 x "7a ee nee os x, ; 
- * ° * F . ' 
WASHINGTON ~Jay's; J. Krasner, ready-to SOMERVILLE, B.Sc care Bree Bhop: Mr a to oan. Broadway Brooklyn. gpentio island Realty Co. Inc, 360 W Bath 508 Flatbush Ave Comp, owner: J Gram Ave: ants eit 170th Street | Street, on a plot 100 by 100 feet 
MORE-Pasl Theodore, women's ready SOUIN = RIVER. K. °J.—-Ceat's shoppe: _p.| Ff Brookiyn; mie Sn ™#09)As Cranmer “Realty. ing “tMarey Boss, Ste 381: soealter Destory dwelling: ty ‘Corp. to Towers, pe, 16 Gourt|at the corner of Sherman Avenue, 
BALTIMORE-—Paul Theodore, women's ready- ~ ow ; e. | ’ : 7 Isaacs. owner; ries ter, architect; | im . ( ). 
ALTIMORE—Paul | The n's i" Klivans, ready-to-wear, cpentowenn, equsies : cor 1984 Bt. 18x64: WN. Y.| Mack. pres) & Abraham alimman, 1690 Lex- | cost $3,009. atth son 8 ‘3 5 Angora he, to a client of Ernest T. Bower, 
BEL AIR. Md—The Hub; A. Rosenberg, wo- . (7) 7.) Ave. (H. Miller). ” City Society of the Methodist Church to|, stom Ave Forrest St, 128-30; to alter 3-story store & to Michele Gallo, 872 th St; mtg $10.00 Inc. The property is assessed at 
men’s ready-to-wear ASHINGTON-—Kaplowits Bros.; Mre. i. 8. | Adele Realty Corp, 463 Lenox Ave; p m mtg 234 St. 24 E 5 &, 24.8989: Low Associates.| dwelling: J. Weder & er Jacobowitz. own-| (§7.70) 
BETHLEHEM. Pa—H. Lasarowitz; S. Lazaro-| Kahan, dresses, wraps; 101 W. sist’ (W.| 1300.7 . Inc (Maxwell L.'Low, pres) to Robert Ed-| ers: Leo V. Berger, + cost $15,000. 46ist St. ™ 8 (40- : Le &}$135,000, and was sold for cash A i 
wits, children’s wear | Loweth Co.). . Sth St. 176 BE. 102.2: David N. Bradshaw to, Wards Realty Corp, 512 Ave; mtg %63,500 \Gienmore Ave, 291; to alter 2-story light mfg. Senceaky , in tidalion. “tp Se-\ above a mortgage of $66,000. Title A ff . ta ‘Short Mule 
DAYTON—Metro Furs; L. Fishman, women's: WASHINGTON—Marvin's : B. | ve B. Bradshaw, die B Toun Bt: mtg $15.-| ($26.40). © dwelling: ‘Anna Zimmer. owner, Boris Jalt| gala ano, i300 4eth Bt, lyn ($5.20). Title Guarantee’ asi etre; reward. 
ready-to-wear ea i ty a as 4 (Mb elnt) ($8.90). Oth Ave, 337, 20x68: Joseph Giannatos! and , ; Cost $3,500. Morris Ave (11-3183), 8 W cor 18th St: Yui] was insured by the : 
McCONNELSVILLE Ohio—A. A. Coulson; R WINSTON-SALEM Taga —_ Bes: ah > 4 100.8; Bite Noland Jr. exr ane Sam Groesma n, 6396 Utica Ave, Bklyn; | Queens | Be ron ; Gor 8 - & ae and Trust Company. 
Dye, m mar : hee oe Rice - ° . m ‘ ’ | Astoria: 284 Bt. ws, 5: & W corner: 8 & corner: n’ 4373): Con vings — 
WEW BRUNSWICK, N. J—May's; Mr. Frisch, Bland. corsets; W. ter, gen. mdse.; :_p m mtg $4,000 ($11) | . : \St_ann'’s Ave, 49 (9 ) 
£ YORK. PaR. J. ‘Thom Stores; W. A w. traf elie inte 1d 950 “adie, "EL: Gairy to Marseret Guiry, is W $5 bie a ors ¢ tor Sith Ave and’ p 0. A| 3 is) he by Lake Colony in New Hands mately Tl pearls, lost April 12 or 13 
WESTIINOTOR. 966.—The Hub, G. i. Rese. Radwiner, women's, children’s, infants’ wear at 45) ’ ; MNS Ole 160th St, et al 2a Ave. ninety-three 2-family dweltings. Arlington Ave (13-3419), w 6 345 ft n sae st: Villa ty at fran B. Toth = a chemaae Tunes Guuti, 
Rg Be leon Humboldt, men's, hove’) isi ith Ave. (H. Miller "Greenwich St, 218, 26.2"160.10, to Washington Wyeinave ee vote penty pny ar ne SO Paul, architect; | “also Astingtep 290, © 6 oS ee Sy The Lakeside Th NY it returned to Wm. M. Mortimer Co., 111 
} 1 . : ” ‘ - Cor (Louls " es) to an CY coe oroth Hu ° aries . r . . . e % 
Syndicate-Alliance, 50 W 35th WHOLESALE eg ge hg ig je ainhndae, Coffee Stores. Inc. 144 Franklin St: mig |Jamaica: 10ist Ave, ss 108 K Remington St; | oS Church St. New Haven, Conn ($96.80) hemes Sas. om pson wae 2 ewe 2-1030 = 
HARTFORD—Sage, Alien & Co; Miss J. Durso, CHARLESTON, 8. C.—H. Resnick & Sons; M.| xem & Heupt. Inc. 218 Greenwich St; |. 865.241; p m mtg $30,000 (8116 06) l-story 50x100. factory, O. oe Owner, iséth St, 706-800 EB (10-2665); trustees Se was sold by Charles Rosentha | Apt. Se er bom. ape 
468-000 ($81 $0) Mist St.” 56- con om. Meche Lutheriscn st yut|Mrs. Dorothy Wexler of this city, | 


- ts - 
33 Phe a * 


; i 
about 39 points each 


ay; mtg $25,000 ($44) 
erenza, architect: cost $3,000. . . 124 (24-3822): Castle u ‘ 
26.4x1008; Otto Dreifus to yy Ave, 503-05, to alter 1-story garage: caatle. it i ie Po ien dott Me ness buildings at 151-9 Dyckman 
oveph Levy Py ty 
| ’ 


ee ee a a | ee oo 


infants’, children’s wear; Miss F. Goldstein Resnick, women's, intents aneeee’s weer,| cons A. yt BA aan rt iis Queens ‘Village: 719th é Dew is rics Fe 
beys’ clothin men's, s furnishings, ha erchiefs, um- adison ‘ « e@ cor 1224 St. 20 11«100 and ano to rothy Gellert. 4 ’ . . 
LANCASTER—Hager & Bro.; Miss L. B. Hardy, brellas; 421 Tth Ave. (H. Miller). | eaien woe to. Beta w" Grown. 60 W yah Be | ($19.38) | Francis Lewis Bivd: nine 1-fami Mi Society, St (#41.25).\who intends to operate it as a) 
bers’ wear CHICAGO—Durabie Textile Co.: I. M. Twery.| mtg $7,000 ($2.75) 85th St, 167 W. 18.9x102.2; Anna Stebbins, et Arondale Homes. Inc, owners; & ‘ ‘ ft 1634 St; summer colony. property in- 
w Bedford D. G. Co; E = mdse. mgr., curtains, draperies, linens, John &t,  Si.4xllOxirres:; Charles ¥.| al, to Car. Roc Realty Co, Inc, 124 W S4th|_ architect; cost $58,500 ' sane Ga: Anthony 1 ’ 1 v~ 
Novick, cosmetics, notions a on. Noyes to Haloda Realty Corp. 226 W 34th) St ($12.65) Flushing: Td Ave, ¢ w cor: s 6 St:| in St, ™/cludes a main residence, six large 
REW HAVEN—Shertenderg’s. Inc; Mrs, CHICAGO—Rel Co.: H. Greenberg, wo-| § $165 000 thoes ids. 138th St, 628 W. 14x99.11; Mary Ernst to stony Gwellings; Rossback Homes, 317 60) bungalows and a tract of more 
Roodberg. infants’ children’s wear: | - ‘s, infants’, children's wear, men's, boys" | f. W. Tha84: Lee Silberstein to’ Julian Callender, 6282 W 138th &t; mtg | ; B. . Linston, architect, cost white Plains Rd (em), s 75 ft mn Burke 
ner mer.. . ishings, handkerchiefs, umbrellas; 421) 230 W 17th St; mtg) $5,875; R m mtg $1,500 ($6.06) | _ $158.000. / ’ Ave; New uo | ph 0, to py Thee-i than fifty acres. Title was insured 
ODG . “ ; . Tth Ave. (= Miller’. 100 }19th St. 5 EB, 25n82; 5 B lvth St Realty Corp bn 3 118th Court; m @ cor; m 5, @) tres, Inc, 240 St: mtg $32. (4), H Title G ty Come 
Dieh) . CHICAGO—Walker-Leavitt Co N. Leavitt, . 25n08.9: Barclay Madison Co (Irving Hirech, pres) to Helen Branfmean. | a Bivd; three 2-family dwellings;| [Amounts i vepemtnense Dew eee stamps by the Home uaranty Com 
Pa women's wear, underwear, sportewear; 42 W. 8. ry ¥ pres) to 140 3%h St’ 41 So Drive. Great Neck, N Y; p m mtg areaby Momes, Inc. owners, J. Burmeister, on deeds, each $1.10 indicating $1,000 grantor’s pany. 
Macalum, underwear, hosiery. ',334 (Murray-Martin Co.). » 1 > doth Ht; (55e). $19,500 ($46.75). architect; cost $12,000. eqyty above mortgages.) 


fy “Se Pe Sar a 





46 THE NEW YORK TIMES, MAY I, 1946. \. NEW JERSEY REAL ESTATE REAL ESTATE WANTED Houses—Nassau-Sutfolk —_ Summer Homes & Camps Buildings & Factories 
————_—_—_=_{_{_{__ Serene eee ewwe MANHASSET FOREST Wi ; aa be th New York State - | Manhattan & Bronx 


REAL ESTATE AT AUCTION REAL ESTATE | 
pam Bt A a, — — —————_—________ Fc 0 Q SA L E , Me ge Ay y ‘|\FOR RENT. Summer season, 2 rooms, ‘ONE: STORY 0600 uaresiricied. Williams 
Oll Heat; 2-Car Garage. MIAMI. kitchen privileges. in pleasant, beautiful) burg Sale Kroft Company, CO 7.9577 
PRICE $29. 500 pa en beautiful 2-bedr bh Le home, secluded, 60 miles New York FOR rent. 1.600 sa ft. for 4 menths — = 
Includes Carpeting, “Bendix” Wash- |on Biscayne Bay. *: me ilar Tnedrom "ome City. Write P O Box 92, Johnson. N Y.} Immediate possession. EV 8-6613 
e. 


—— 


ee Prorenris AK OUTSTANDING INVESTMENT! m Ht noprox. 125,000 Sq, Ft 
AUCTION 7% 3 { L ‘ Ire achine._ Ketrigerator. Stov tions, annual rental tn ew Je 
MAY 18 An Investment of $37,500 1-STORY MANUFACTURING SPACE REQUESTED ns Tull Club. Privileges jor ‘nearby ‘Connecticut, not, yrs eo | BELHOR,, WT neat ce ccaanfarababd suconit nt ay 


Under Tent at N. E. cor. A. BROADWAY 
my a ge | Port. Advertising executive. cottage for rent. all conveneinces: four)" race ground floor 462100. second. third 


Harding Bivd. & 150th St, Queens fi) | NEAR 8TH ‘ 
wae COT he Hoes tartiarerea, Of WILL TIELO $8100 per Year Pireprest peter, oeecetame WHIPPANY, NEW JERSEY fer all types of property a 8 ee sereage-~waiertront’ “Dupers|race ‘track. "Tel Beimor 3058, Wed, Pri or, Wag cach. (fuck oar quick or 
: bap a 7 " session: $25,000. Owner GL 3-200 
You wilt re RM os Be 35 000 sa tt Built 1942 om S0-acre plot” Quick is ovate _ Manhesort 1300, we ee t. senuY LAKE | EASTERN” PARKWAY, 1886; tes f00,2 

y sq. ft. ae Fp nt Decisions. OYSTER BAY. Palstlal wateriront heme.|"5, ctor County section. italy “ease 8} Outstanding property for sale, including! gin, pes gay Meet: Pome $21,000. 


year-round Tesidence. built k 
shore fron i 500 - — - 
cy Fae *- SALE UNRESTRICTED 


IDEALLY LOCATED : Available Jan., ‘47 president at cost of $40,000; will dispose 
Park. Queens. MAGNA MANUFACTURING Co..xc. | EDWARD SCHWARTZ | *\suitable for family of 4 in agreeable reste], HORACE A. SPRINGER, REALTOR | . : 

©" Te be offered os 2 parcels. Accessible to all tracking & transportation | Balance Jan., ‘48 444 Madison Ave... New York 22, w.Y v~~ gy (ented section within commuting distance|Andover, N J Tel_ 385) 00.000 ft. S-story brick. possession, 2¢- 

+ 113 ACRES— At Sayville, | Suftols INCOME ABOUT $90,000 Eldorado 5-4136 512 FIFTH AVENUE, CH 4-4500 [reiton s-4008 New York. Mrs. Durrell can visit the|GREENWOOD LAKE. Vor sale, modern 00° {*. Sprinkler loading platforms. ott 

| County, L. 1. (former Island Hill Golf SECURITIES PRICE 000 OS SEROSSS ESSEC OES C8 PATCHOGUL.  Weauilful country home, house "at ang time, Please phone Mr.| house, well furnished. beautifully land-|"orj,,"* \* St subway: light om 4 sides 

4 Country Club). ; | well located on large landscaped plot: sca gorgeous view on Greenwood Lake , 

ard Country Cle Long Term MR. SCHWaRTE MASSACHUSETTS REAL ESTATE | SS \s “attractive rooms. modern kitchen, oil| (ore references submitted oe immediate occupancy. De Lyra. 318/44 Court st Byokion TR 5.0887 


To be offered as 1 parcel. cannot be duplicated today” s rising : : CASH ¢ “business with.|W Tot 
Immediate occupancy price 36,750. or your property er ness h. TR 4-3620 
prices. y > Warren F. Law. Patchogue 33 or}, 9 48 hrs: need 1-2 family houses Lons|OAKLAND Rooms summer season, pri- ayy! wyenwre ——~—— Sale Sroas. 


Send or call for yo and Terms 
Fred Berger, Auctioneer PRINCIPALS CONTACT . | WA NTED I iAmaica 3-6127 [Island duzing or selling. See JOHN F.| vate, adjoining baths: hot. cold .| 3 
LAVE-STEINFELD CO. INC. St NY EXCELLENT PLANT ROCKVILLE CENTRE Modern hoaseE /M°CABE. Broker. NE 9-0765; Ti. 8-0987.lxitchen, dining-room privileges, bathing | 39-000 {t. L-story, windows om 2 sides 
FRED BERGER co. INC. ! . { - | garage, screened porch, living room with| Fd Roosevelt Ave. Jac “kson _Heights. _jboating near by: commuting E ott yoee SS. story. windows on 2 sides 
| break NEEDED IMMEDIATELY Oakland, N. J. Phone Onkland 8-595! Pring te, Sat Dulemee evaliaite 
Principals only. G. BE. WOOD. WA S40 
| 
| 
4 


70 Wall St., N. ¥. 5, N. ¥. HA. 3-0901 1819 B'way (Steinfeld) atc —— 0 0. fireplace, dining room. sun parlor = 
1 RON fast nook, laundry room & lavatory: 24), ternational banking company peauires| SOUTS ‘ORANGE (Se Mountain section) 

ee es “Action by Auction” oom 8 X REAL ESTATE In NEW BEDFORD 20,0 0 to 60, 000 S FT. floor, 3 bedrooms, Yule bath with py house, East Side, between 35-65 5 bedrooms, 3 bathrooms, also basement , 280 BOERUM ST. BKLYN 
AVAILABLE I I egies $10.500, all’ cash, Rockville Centre| Reply Graybar Bi com 207. lavatory: off heat, tiled kitchen, 10520) eee ee a eiting a ieee 
i ut, includin Ajotnt: le "x56; 
REAL ESTATE FOR EXCHANGE Fer Sele er Rent One or Two-Story Garage-Type Bidg, SEA. CLIFF —TMMEDIATEOCCUFANCY Farms & l t kp Ye ~ oll Neat: loading platform; price $8, 73¢. 

| } | ee rch, 1 screened porch, 3 individual Gerotsky, CA 6-0015 
Attractive duplex, & rooms each; oppo-| BROOKHAVEN. At T 

Ssiveniteaainebtiaiedan 1 IMMEDIATELY ji Haram Industrial Lone Ps ane Sater Det, hat bench gaunt A watered At 2. |B Bit ase ee Pn poderss em, Tetaetines 
190 000 * . and shopping facilities: good commuta- oeres , very wales to NY i Yarge| Tent $7,086: price $45,000: ‘splendid in 


5,000 — , senting end fncuing i | 230,000 sq. ft. of floor space Additional Land Uesirable jtton; rented half pays interest & taxes:| desirable sounavir & location: bergain.|“nodern 3-room apt. also large 3-rocm vestment. Frank A Badolate. Ine. 6422 
Square Feet estate have increased great- Hs: 17 300._Fhone, Owner, Manhasset 3796J.iss 000 Craig Route 25-A. East Norwich: ln -cinouse, furnished; private dock. rent\ll_Av, Bkiyn BE 6.7200 ' 
gr . . rs Will Divide Z 2308 Times year-round beans. T bed-|Oyster Bay 1626 , Times - 0.60 PT FoR SALE— 
ly since our business was 24 Story rooms, beth, living room, dining room. |= ——————————________ Rah acclbs tae choles 9.4 rm one male. ay cae, oh eee 
Jelectric range f& Frigidaire’ also tncluded.| Farms & York State ia{urniahed ‘summer bungalows on private GOODYEAR REALTY TR 5-T9T1 


Various Units Available 
established in 1904, and par- | | bungalow, 2 bed bath, et a 
Robert Joseph e c. M. PERKING pa Ct |summer bungalow, rooms, bath, ete;| farm “campy 1 hr NYC. AC 5.8704 10,300" LOFT, pos id RR idl 
q istety_ burnien —¥ — Mihaly, Glenfield: Z. Lobi, mee FURNISHED cottage, & ae privaie lake: heat. power. subways. Tic ff 


ticularly since the passage w 
ANT }ampton ting facilit 5 i 
gD Sun by « intanent: ites: gio 00 "ee Craig. BEAUTIFUL 220-acre on Pam _ miles NYC. SC 4-97 KI thse CHNER-GOODHEART, MAin 4-007 


SPEAR & CO.. INC. | of the rent laws In 1945. | ’ Herbert McLean Purdy Management 
AShiand 4-4200 } Street level » Wes, | LOFT TO RENT Route 25-A, East Norwich, Oyster Bey eetiidings and water, new Massey’ Harris Harris a 35,000; IMMED poss; 1 fi. light & sides 
Ii Unrestrietee—West Bronx 342 Medison Ave., New York 17 MU 2-3830 | | 1626 tractor. fully equi . 4 head of high . power: of] heat. subs: ba gain 
Our selution ef those prob- Steal and concrete building. . Approx. 10,000 re Feet. ‘FOR sale. beautiful” small eatale.com-| rade Holstein cattle, 300 hens, team, ten. BANBURY (near Lake Candlewood) §- KIRSCHNER-GOODHEART. MAIN 45207 
hasten 3—™ | pletely and newly furnished and recent-|*5t house, electric, 11-room house sautitul location eee fe cite | 108 FT, one-story factory, treck deer; 

oO 


ae aS 
ell 


Ist Mtge. $36,500 for 12 Years. eee t f i |sarage, $16,500: 9 rooms, Ji, baths, cen- W “i be 7 ; 
. or manufacturing naide| ROom 2002, Shelter} Industries, Inc., 630) WANTED to about E-room cottage. urner and office space. excellent for 
ser hal Dutch estonial; new paint | |S Av, NY. CI é fee on lake or Sound, within 50 mi, ™4#nufacturing or distributk Priced for 


Brokers Protected STA M. ¥. Clty, Vicinity or L. 1. City and out; 2-car garage; large corner plot: 
. FOR sale ‘ef July-a , ys je-| Wick sale 
one of the best residential sections: price , — cemetery property ith mead well, |ehone be . rr a te tele LOUIS SCHLESINGER COMPANY 


REAL ESTATE to the owners whose prop- || 
prep Heavy or Light Manalactaring OHIO REAL ESTATE Will Purchase Fixtures -~ a, Fully stocked and equipped 200 acre|! LONDON vicinity. 1 rooms, excel 
Cove. Glen Cove 1168. ate ‘ree em. neat. A real buy at eeu open May 29. EN 23-6053, Apt) olers, suitable for wareh use OF manufac- 
FOR SALE nufacturing Plant FOR LEASE ry land available); $25, y iM 1 
3 23440 mes rae - - steel casement windows on 4 sides: teo 
BROKERS OFFERINGS "AVAILABLE T0 A PURCHASER ~ FOR BALE. Very me, « bed- Rogier. Rowie 3. Gueenia. > Route 2. Oneonta, N r Other Sections 10x12 ft doors: 18 fect ceilings. concrete 
" th. Oyster Bay a RRCKETTS TOWN ( 
ONE STORY BRICK Knitting Mil, Reputable Firm xOK 4000 oq ft: Union City. entin 
fh rr ~aere lake. room: . © Electric 0! .2-story building, approx 190x709 ft. 4 
- Houses Montohoste ‘County ance tiene” ai alow. Pons | cabin: :liomeee yb... 4 a woe = _~ light; heat ag pomsenat! m July ist. 
u 
* 
814x108. ol Burner, Commercial & Industrial Dept. |'nspection convenient transportation | 75139 wae ; a. - " 
Loft Wanted chopping: $25,000. RR. Albert Cucinell, | MODERN SUAIGN Taciery Tabrlcated Woose | *2-BEoed St. New Yoru 4. WY VACTORY Pom eal CEW Seusee 
11,000 “ ™ Selling Basement 
BROOKLYN REAL ESTATE 
location, beautiful home section. this pre perty con ne bought re tm 


a lems has been’ advantageous | aera ettable f 
D ne ee nce ser ften or new furnace, beth and hardwood — beautiful location: over 4 acres: $5,900 t brid smediat po _ 
H for dheahe fz, qastupeed: rely "one ienetian | Clean. well located. Sacrifice at $19,000. |Josephson, S78 E i6ist Seof, Tr ete Ce 
ree i kitchen, oil burner: t doubl: “le 
SIE Be: SEC : > erties we menage. i blocks from & buses. ——— = FULL COOPERATION WITH BROKERS rage; centrally \ocated “occupancy im “4 excellent buildings, 48 head of! lent food & service: charmingly fur New Jersey 
i) PRINCIPALS ONLY IMMEDIATE OCCUPANCY ust: must be seen to appreciate Test Ee \Soseke nearly new tractor. 2 teems. 2-|nished waterfront home: swimming and HOBOKEN. For sale, brick belldlng SAUOS 
EDG ARD SCHR AUB | BASTINE & CO. INC. JACOB & EMIL LEITHER ING. PL 809 TIMES i price $35,000. James Pardo on Petite) facnily house with elec, furnace, hardwood) golf: rates $65-$90 weekly per person | sq ft floor aren’ somos ne : 
. 112 East 18th a. AL 4-7520 } | 5340. 14950. Brees. Mott Haves 9-3700 } rooms w sun Broker. Ch my Valley a turing. Modern offices. Ot! heat Burhora, 
baths; modern, good construction & N s ode, 1 
REALTY iNVESTMENTS LOFT WANTED condition. of heat: | Sclontal aa am A nya Malas ‘ wee | A New ark St OF ie 
center owner t: possessien MONHEGAN TELA , oo . Weadla rr 3 net . 
* Yo |wa ss oe other eR oe features: mo tistic feo mee aes ae Ce I pe TE = ee 
. desirable home, 
6,000 te 10,000 Square Feet veoms, 6G verner. ote: 9-car garage: 8 ———EE oe > Chester, NS Weasilfal| [0°re: 18.000 ‘sq ft extra ground; rail- 
SOLICITED ON BRONX Goats See Uae ) $4 property | 530x206; ye ~~ a summer residence. 17% acres. 2000 feet ‘4 Mding available 
| | — 15,000 crale. mete A. arms rea frontage on salt water with wharf. Near) 15 99 FOR LEASE a 
ey oy Stine fe tor 100% Reta | Locat on Servi paved highway. House containing 6 bed oq ft: Union City: entire 24 floor 
age, In 
Apts, Taxpayers, ete. reilroad 3829 ans s f ‘ : 
on (25th Street TAXPAYER titi Fo isa" _f¥. 09089 __ part W000 Seton © 3-Famly Sr, |snellont vende JER aging Property 14 cane™acmenane ‘ean tS ht REALTORS. 
new, immeaiate occupancy, now open for); Y write! cant: possession. Eastern Trust Co, Mall- a9 pournet Guuare lerane Ot . 
N fax. NS, or Captain T Juell, Room 12124 pm quare ney by 
vurr Square ? ™ ae 
26 COURT ST., B'KLYN 6,500 5q. Ft. Ground Floor yl . Fay Now JOHN Ww. GALBREATH & co. B ildi Eee Pere Av, Veunere; CURRIE) Living room. small bedroom, kitchen Ho ac w SCHLESINGER FOR FACTOR 
ore later. manufactar- " 5-929 t ‘ = G ) ‘ nes 
MA 4.7463, 4, 5 12,000" * tad Ploer gy ines wholesaler, store ‘er “oie 5 cna org OF OO Sg Fe, MOUNT VERON cent oy cnmers™ incgg: Gisa"Pob seston” Cinta Se eee ae ee ie:| tmmetntr pete Pane oe wae 
4 homes available immediately. | . " : - > ea a ~ -. seession. | ory and base- 
ber available for IMMEDIATE DELIV-| ¢nette refined uple;| ment. brick building. truck height loadin 
Price $61,500 lumbus, Ohio 10,000 Sq. Ft. $9,060: 8-room frame, plot 40x10. 2-Car [ERY seate ‘motel tor your. Inspection, ta|senson. ES ie Wie Teele: | ethers, wuliaing. Crock height leading 
Principals Only 
MAURICE A, PEARSON 7 H. Gerber Machine 
ANT . pproved by V. A. appraiser, $19,000;) on K u - ; ~ a 
WEST END AVENUE CORNER LEONARD $. GANS & COMPANY 19 W. 44th Se. MU. 2.4428 Je) W. ED 35 Greene St..N. Y. CA. 6-2680 N Exceptionally attractive clapboard colonial,|Om State Highway No 23. at ‘Buller, ATTRACTIVEly fernished 3-room bangs- 2 !Pt0P St. Newark 2, NJ MAruet 2.6500 
hy a. 4 aot » ~ LOFT To RENT ——< <<< — — | cceupiod a carefully maintained by orig-|FOr, information om same call Chrdwel ii low. -in reoh; at Long Beach Connecticut 
i! 6f &. 42nd St. MU 2-0855 jinal owner; & rooms, 2 baths, with show-|¢-2882. 05 = ss Jel, 386 W 262d St. NY C SEACTIFCL 
Mite. $238,400. wnent oo Pr. $295.000 | ’ —aww ers; gas-fired hot water heat: fireplace ouse; 2-3 acres, on Hiver or — pms I ey brick Mock thas 
= LOS ig CR aes Ee mele alae front. to buy: bet 60-18 ‘milen from njee Satie ast” sleet ie iat 
hn nn ee PP Pe 2 2 — { e 
45th St. (Near Sth Ave.) | FOR RENT.__, = ANGELES || 5 soe 000 e ee cere, estate Hope RO one Ee 
ere neal wit Pix Nat Bk Bidg. Mt Vernon 7-1863-4\trom 835.000 to $45,000: eel. or private lake. with or without house; gon 
Rent $28,000. Prise $18, 2 hvws. $71,000 | FULL COOPERATION WITH BROKERS Estate Wanted ron SKILL (suburbds, 1 hour NYC). Ex-| one loveliest 25 to 50 miles from N ¥. Z373 Times. | Wonted 
deal cellent property, 3 modern coerce es ant beautiful old re-|WANT tf p ouse on lake, WANTED ts io perchase of lease ballding, 


' opportunity for user 
te convert te ities BROOKLYN WRITE Z #210 TIMES WILL PAY CASH FOR available immediately, brings over $1, rates Li with some acreage; 25 to 50 miles f ‘ . 
ANY TYPE PROPERTIES ummer. artes! well, hot water = charming wood - ¥. ZMT1 bY . miles boven approx 28 sq ft metropolitan area. 
REMARKABLE OPPORTUNITY —— : Write details to Mr. Harry, tee = 20 ft frontages near = work old ft 2d yet with con- x mee = ~~! pra 
|} 13,500 Sq. Ft. (Ground Floor) WANTED 10th floor, 48 W. 2lst St N. ¥.C. | 2, cine belicins on preset) vensanees: center, bak. jorge Ev Pose. Real Estate for | Lichange lars. "4. Gross, Room 1010, 304" Madi- 
WA ° —— = rooms HOUSE EXCHAN hi New * 
Tel. “For sale two S-room cot- place: mod mod bit, 2 maid's and b& th Sets aids cheseh 3. rechingsen . - New INDUSTRIAL. — commerclal ~ belidina ze 


WEST END AVE. (Wr. Ir. 16th $t.) Ris 
h Ceiling, Daylight, 3 Loading ————————_————————————— 
¢ Kote Possession Piatiorms. Fireproof Concrete }| WILL PURCHASE DRESS PLANT neces eee want Cmte? 2 2” baths: hot water “heat, oll ertesian|cld brick detached bungalow: % mile D C|, Warehouse wanted. 10.000 to 30.009 sq ft 
mtg. 18-300. Prigg $85,000. OR LEASE LOFT Houses—Queens _|penp sahe and shopping: $7.00 for both | O; ewimming pool: one section of barn ew BA ye hoe le 
f develo box stalls 6407 Flander Dr, Hyattsville ashington Heights 
35,000 FT. Ind ries, } | in the Boro-Park section of Brook reve DemIne, Vecant detached brick, ‘Holly TCARBDALK Vie anrensvacn {°° "ding a Rousing fe for 1,000 chick. | 1.008 8Q FT, wil exchange for 2,000 to WANTED TO LEASE or purchase 14 
HAROLD M. SILVERMAN u- Besoment and lyn. Minimum space 10,000 ft. B woca path with stall shower, extra lave- GENTLEMEN'S ESTATE eas; Sen? paren, rem, ogee Suncege 2.00 09. f8._ Call BV_4- Tide pence ee fi, mee have partis 
Vee LOFT Principals Only Write full detalls for immediate ff ior. finished basement wit ee Sil eae atchetaat jaa, and eardene. | 94 w Mala. St. Bortastowh, 8 Real Gelgte Mlecstencees  |tanr Gon iets Stee om 
2 's radia | rambiing Frngiish home, unusue dence, r + “- 

va | eather wh = oo { FIREPROOF ToFT BuiLoine . ; ‘500, terms. See Mr. Caggiano! “charm Secluded—yet "90 Asolated ——_ ie FR 36, Bes 19. __ | ANHATYAN real ssiaie boughi and vol "* he idipional’ ie rt 5.008 sq 
| 149 Bway BA 71-6128 on n anted for rent 


Aprinklered; excellent light W 149 Times om | Inc.. 40-14 74th St. Modern as today, built to last « i K 
: generation m iipetrick, 9 oP 1 6 
and construction 3 Passenger Williams & Co., Inc. ("= ny Nm 9 6has seer master bedroome4. baths le arms ‘ Acreage—Gonnecticut \HARLES E DAVIS JR. Rewsenbors. LT. Qoees 3am, qhuamnatian. Baym 
Frei Elevator. ated ANTED= =~ Vr brick, | Interior reflects perfect appointments Connecticut we have fine farms, fine! properties for discriminating clientele t ' 
Brokers Invited 1178 Broadway CAledonia 5-6866 YOFT SP FLUSHING. $12,330; vacant, new cash Unusually large roome—well panned. Out-| woodlands. high elevation, near the'Remsenburg, West Hampton Beach % and ™ proskmatet or Bey, Jott re building “p- 
| ACE or STORE decor Thompson, dpor per peek. gardeners cottage and garage. Merritt Parkway. Trumbull, Monroe, Fair-|Quogue and vicinit $15,000 $30 000; | niture manutact -- astm oo 


34th Street (6th Ave.) 


Finest tecation— Manhattan m ave. 
POSSESSION OF 10 FLOORS JSP ER RING “UU'sead 


Mts. 7595. 000. “taen 0.000 } 
eceecesesooeceseeceses® 


OPPORTUNITY OF LIFETIME ¢ > FOR RENT / I! 


CHAIN STORE TAXPAYER i Guaranteed Possession! 


2 ety. firepreet. off burner 
MTG. $55,000 Rent $12,000. Pr. $120,000. > 324 EAST 24TH ST, 


Magnificent structure. Neto $5,600 50x96; 6 FLOORS AND BASEMENT 
EXCEPTIONALLY MERITORIOUS : aadichaore. sey Hot 


$5,250, convenient, (principals) Available now for field and Westport. Write or call. Welsummer rentals also. Eastport 152 m preferred > he as 
, liv stear Times 


5,000 to 6,000 aa. ft, ¥ eh? — Listed exclustvely with |will be pleased to serve you. Nagy’s ReallLARGe « 
° Manhattan Ares” FLUSHING. “Fireom house, solidly built, MYRON L. BLUM COMPANY lEstate, 484 Kings Highway, Bridgeport, «— Tecation Kish" Tine Mahal: GAMAGES, GAS STATIONS, FACTORIES 
wfacturing Foctisties wiet street, convenient, $10,000 cash. at Station HARTDALE Scars 6250,Conn. Telephone: 5- = - ALL BOROUGHS 
~~ Pr Incipale-o only. W281 Times, SCARSDALE (New Rochelle). |CATALOG! Recent selected va. | Wanted ALPHER. 142 MONTAGUE ST. MA 4.2040 
| wellings, rooming houses. “PHOLSTERER wishes bide 15-6 00 oq 


BR OKLY | The mur 15,000 NEW COLONIAL HOME under construc-| photographs American Farm x 
40 ce Sq. me 1 su saree arora Avenue, get, Com York 18 pany | 7° ies POASESS “ ¢ th — og! me =e ey lovely country punbart tan smal; -— e ‘Bronx. Georse Man- {ti cash, $20.000 Broker W92 Times 
ious rooms off the setting in & evel location: smart cen- yn. Bronx eorge M. Mayer 
4 4-1287 Modern brick, 6% spac ign. The ter hell plan, @ & 7 large, sunny. corner|> M JOSEPH Oenbury Conn Pb ice wd 2.58 Industrial Sites 
Cc Rote. tat ee of home ou dream abouts conalsting rooms: finest construction; fully ineulated.|— is K] = a ae a an where fi. JAMAICA Unrestricied 
4- Story, roof, oncrete, tyre dio-living room, dining ‘room, slate roof, brass piping & beautifully fin-| Farme 4 Acreage— New Hampshire ete we tA haa? baat $-4011.| store location s0n14¢  . eaeemene chats 
klered > di 20-Ft. Ele- ___Houses—mM Fi v oun > ® throughout: price from $27,500 tole : ! xpayer on prop 
inkler tag. . anhattan Le Bronx ence kitchen and dinette, la watery oo nee SACRE term. 2 ak Grom Litisien| 
vator, Dri High Ceilin ae floor, 3 lovely bedrooms Hollywood RAYMOND R. BEATTY. INC —s Office on State highway: productive! _ Apartment Houses —_ 
etor, rive- in, ig ge. | stall shower, - ma oll heat, Fa ee Tex mes 
IMMEDIATE POSSESSION . an lopen terrace, garage. venetian biinds.|. 30 Garth Road Scarsdale 7 ie eas. 4 1 eee ae ee Oe seri - Manhattan & Bronx A payers 
SCARSDALE SCARSDA w * Mts. 6°R” (Madison). Hered build nn QUEENS—MODERY 
storm windows, @ large garden, many wom mnanow Presidential Range, Green Mts Excep-|"unus yearly rental $5,500 Princes 1-story 


Principals Only 

other beautiful and extra features | “OUN Ittonal location for buildt h 

¢ $8,800, due in 1 RLES | ‘THE BEST IN COUNTRY LIVING ion for ng summer home,|..iy Exclusive brol “1 te 12 stores 

: Drive-in; Unrestricted Williams fh Co., Inc. oe includ ee = Re ee © 5%. 8080 e — Se | N Z pragpesccems —-. = 3, -43,- a — yy 0's Tree tare) ner Pian» rt Rental #11 208 : 
3360 yw taxes aceptionally ne commu moder over 

HAROLD M. SILVERMAN 4 — ag Bay RA. Yeors v8 Broadway CAledonia 5-6866 roR sale, brick ke a ra | - | Union fpie ate Sta "Raat Exit 6-5 Ts FEW CHOICE PLOTS OFFERED TO |tle-upe; rite aul ie —_ ing; milk) Rd year mise. ped emg . QUEENS—Mop . x. oe - 

mode ences. burner . ‘ ‘ NB “KFRONT 
old all rp convent oll years FOREST HILLS ) | ple of discrimination and good taste. |ouse.  W: Lyster, Bethienem, 66 8T, G2 & G4 W incor Ceniral Fark W) cot muevaaiae ye $4. 





erty, Price $3] 300 gma Times 


fe Groker e 
m0 ait oe nerinecoes E+ JACK NUSSBAUM SSE otter 6 Fe SOLID BRICK RESIDENCE Ce en ey Pinks | _ Parme & hore nd —_|_ Two" S-story apartment buildings. good Rental © 49,200 annum 
e| MIDGLEY PA condition; 1 store, thirty 4-room apts CAN BE INCREASED 


mere rman see Si7s Fifth Ave. - 5-6027 » Lgne ISLAND REAL ESTATE Housee—Brooklya @% spacious rooms, modern kitcheM, |4 Chase Road, Scarsdale Tel Scars 9127 TRUK COLONIAL. Bulli in 1064; Wane " 
tall shower, mortgage $34,600, savings bank, due $1950 NO MEAT SUPPLIED 
PYfrrerPPeerrrrr ry SAY WIDGE. | Sapte, qereres J aoben, Hel cat sac |TUCKAHOE. Smait estais for modest in-| stone chimney with crane, in perfect {mor £10,408 per annum. price $45.000 |Price $19,500 cash above frae mortence 
— ing the bay: 1 Pan - 2 bat om lay fe y' tes, inch refrigerator. come, 6-room house with ground level|/ condition. located in the kitchen; situated!) w Greene. 2112 Bway R T2080 NET OVER $4 504 
16 Sites for G. |. Homes Wat, 35 ita roomy. 3 rage, ali accessor basement used as kitchen and dining on «@ hill overlooking one hundred and tis ST, K (near Pleasant). i1slil’. aa) ADVANCE REALTY CO” NE ®&S800 
car immed ooonpe 


Exclusive With Upper floors, two 3-room apart-|twenty acres of fine Fae in horse ~ 
TRYLON REALTY i pe -| ner sessed $35,000; rents $7,356. price $30,-|,72°20 Roosevelt Av, Jackson Heights 
6,000 Sq. Ft. Lach 8 : aR. Ay En a) 1 O_,- 7 y “SY = re excellent terms principals only Py 1 Tenant W eat« hoster 
2 ~ ’ ‘ ed to U. S Postoffice 4 yea te 
pe ayy seg West)—1-family brick, S\other smail house. First floor apartment|Cassard, Inc, Agent and Broker, Jenifer) rent Realty, 1200 1 Ay (68 St dee a ane eine “ . 

we ae wo 4 = bore |" reomne, finished basement, colored tile/owner-occupied and available July 1s 2 Bidg. Towson 4, Md ia LJ! tage YR a : Soom beat not Other Tr j oA " hens. "Princtpete 
$1 1850 Each Tt aces jbeth. stall enower, Mesias yy pling storm | blocks station, sho schools, Price 19'900 F 4 w water volrioeretion: Seess pent 4a HNenry J Frie@man 87) ?f AY LA “2 

Vicinity 23rd Street ht 4 aid ’ —- —___—_—_ | windows. ccresee: rice $8,950 incipals ROY KE McC LESKEY arms Acreage anted a f on TAN 

Eight ga J. EDWARD BREUER T Iva 1053. 629 Ist Nati Bk Bldg Mt Vernon 7-1963-4/ GUTSERRY acreage wanted, Ute To) TOMS, 19 be arranged Master ME 5-6000 TAXPAYER leasehold tor sale Expires 

BEAUTIFUL SMALL ESTATE acres planted to small mulberry trees » s a ba” we Aotedee av} . a $37 000 cool m stores. Nets better than l¢ 


1002 100—3 Business Sidgs. Excellent location 17 Stetion Piaze Great Neck 3737 ||, &- ‘emily belek. bem! 5 en HEIONTS 
t s, Lefrigerators, combination sink, brass| 2- family brick duplex, 6 and 4 rooms, 2- WITH PANORAMIC HUDSON pall within 50-mile radius of N Y C or lower am samelh tab.one.  fireh Gata KNICKMAN-TANNER 


RENTAL $30,000 551 SthAve. NYC MUrrayHill2-8987 nding. excellent tion. Re 4 tructed  13-year-old| : 
plu ng. condition al bar- possession now of 6 rooms me timber and. stucco mm. ituated| anna ne Westbury 887 or writ a ravings banks. price $48 000 In- 164-08 Hillside Av. Jamaica tA &-3004 


SACRIFICE PRICE $226,900 «ff 15,000 sq. ft. per floor ole. em hice 2 ae 71500 Con 
URICE ABRAMS Py tamil brick duplex, @ and 4 rooms,/on a high point overlooking the Hudson \qnnn” hithway or walertront prope M N mw Lofts—Manhattan & 8 
Immediate Possession 2017 86th “st ES 2-7212 7 t: cost is tatlored to its lovely 2-acre tract for Ax HURWITZ anhattan ronx 
——=-|2-Car garage; possession ot ne. apt com fullest advantage of magnificent river), asm. Tae By Saraeie: potee, Coteus is lst 1472 Bway BR 9-107TS 1 Av, 2119 (corner 100 84) 
Price stagger plan: 5 bedrooms. 4 baths etter._D38e Times . AMSTERDAM AV (corner 107 81). - Ground floor space. 1 4 


ea T's | BUSHWICK | section, 2-1 family house and|$24.000 when new. " ” 
john Finck 118 East Sind st. { Rent $2.00 per foot DOCTOR'S or DENTIS rear with driveway, hot water: immed!- Lin | 2-family, Page, venant-occupied(=!Th master sulte in 1 wing, guest and | hs apts with stores. 5 times rent. H JOHN J. DIC KERS N. IN 
Times OFFICE eee at Sask Ne eee ae tae ane ee iae’| MEMPETEAD, Whe, SOUT SaaS evant ‘Si tegh huts © Sons. f1 Emon peep 0 io aes 
a i ‘oom, dining room opens 42 St ] 2-2300 . 
‘ wre Stes | FOR RENT \= Ri ow 2 (Av U Brighton line). = ae —_. 3 tee Price 12.300 | iene "Terrace spose orenare. Re Payee 1021" Av Z, Bklyn lou “oek Bs Baokx 99 FAMILIES” New Law yy as. eee, we _noerermis 
“seer oe oeoooee { » > - . 
! | fam 2-car gar. rquet “oe '. — and Rewer sardene. bem) seclusion 84 oe "end can te ne station, S-story walk-up. 3s, 4s; rents $13,236 IMMEDIATE PORAESSION 
be] ee seaeene small 2- tome. and ¢femily. |grectous for commuting. price 43.500 ae 1978, event steam on —— vise eer eS eon due 1960 | 23.000 ft on 2 floors in fireproof bidg. 2 
mtge, ceptional bu erted sem AU. — Improved 5 ‘ f Sran< nt t > 
B ILD ERS!! | 2 UPPER FLOORS | STORING OHVESTINS 68, I" lag corr. i pede i BMT imr|cists. Prout W78, Main St. white Pisins| % older “i Tine Tine. PMSE AV tary 18 apartarete 3 mig business. oe 
Profeasional locations at 8 Av, . ite Plains 2370 or Scarsdale 5473 . st apartments, 2 KERSEY CO. 15 E40 St LE 2-s180 
U salad | VACANT I Outing Green 9.0608 pt —Laa —— — ms Ce , —ey and 2-family aoDERNIZED hor : a. 1 2 baths; | PO;WENS Uses Lote Westehester Cou stores. rental ar Other offerings. {909 FY basement space, 1916 Arther Ae 
i | USK méing Brick 2 Family) Many ; convenien corner, a at B Tremont. Bronx, Suitable bowling 
' 1 with 7 Immediate Possossion j 6 and 23-family epartment -10: , ait Northwest corner A art on 
laterested in becoming associated } . €ross-ventilation, 2|/hemer, siso 4- fing ee sit : a only. reine 8 0 bt a te af By Ry - >) at leva m lent mtg, ote: private entrance 


| for User houses, Buy! or i. 
experienced builder in LARGE SCALE ATE (1-5 & 1-6 rooms). large i ‘ 
| Entire 4 Story Bids. 20x00 WESTCHESTER REAL EST A A Ae come ee TON McCABE KENNETH IVES & CO Lots Wi A ental $10. nd, empenaed 06 000: price 968. FOR rent, apper Manhaiian, separats 
net tile rooms 000 sell concrete or ~ abe simateiy 29 We sq 


no ened — «+p booth | sh cellent Real Rate Wwe M WANTED “To lease, lot with Tones, 100s 
BUILD! OPERATIONS Monthiy Tenants. tl vite arith of c th owers, ex lumbing and = Regre 4 ws @ St — be hia) Court St, Br! TR 5-0841 
“ ~ 1 res J 1 restricted section, pref-| D6ts, m : t ta + ton elevat 
4 heating system. Near everything. Owner te aa = ‘WE 6-0768. ‘House s—New ersey erably vacant a il pr > STURVESA ce 1k 18 BO t Y- - are ” 2 n ‘ 


’ Jisacrifices this well-kept home. (Imme- Nas med 
OF {-FAMILY HOUSES / 435 4 Ave. (30 $t.) i NEARBY diate possession of 1 apt) for £13,500. __OPEN EVENT “AND a 9 wes ALLENWURST. For sale, od rs | iron _yerd. Cs __ eee laten gual" metie $15 500 aeed terms. STORAGE space, 1.000 sq ft per tent, 
en partnership basis 32.800 ’ ee nn JACKSON gay Be se erreen | eee cre notes ie A avatery,’ 3-eat Homes & Camps [LEWIS HERMAN, 11 W 42 Ot. LA 40118. | oho Bem es Columba nee ee 
. IN LOVELY DITMAS PARK |., enclosed sun porch. Immediate OcCU-|) piocks from beach, also 5 minutes from) MANHATTAN BEACH, modern ammenl G8 GED tnocme: 44.500 Over 180 mortease able immediately lower Manhatten 
7 spacious rooms 2 baths; of] heat; 3 ga-|—~ ree year home. Z3513_ Times. —~| to Hotel Whittier-by-the-Sea; large, airy BELOW 110 5 lent for woodwork shop: mid-Ma 
cusTOM BUILT BUNGALOW !"17-room corner home, on double lot, re-|for season, reasonable. ES 23-9701, 1-5 P WEST BRONX 


FOR RENT | pee 5 
S6TH (BET STH-6TH " X 4 ‘Fosas-v4s0 On one acre of beautifully landgeapes jcenti decorated: 4 Daths. 1 lavatory. o- * SEA GATE. 1-T-reom api, ~“seean treet. , oo house or storage 149 Greene St 
rounds, & rooms, 3 modern pecially suited for doctor's residence location. reasonable; summer only.| Facing park a a. rent 340.460 SMALL loft, 23 Si, Wear 1 Av; wonderful 


Midtown-West 35th St. JB" scvs, wernopouiran ave. aTBURa, — B, “tered al ye a tm 
ona: ve t, centrally matic elevator . ligt = 
° { B'KLYN, METROPOLITAN AVE. FLA Lon aT _RD. 2 stall "showers, except pr MR heat, (° “+~ i Prem pane BR ~ $19,000 Aemata Av pun C. Rosenkrans. 96 600 over t4% 10-yr mts north aht BA ’ 
le DOCTORS room ‘°F 2012 Mermy Y = LorT 
2 Elevater Brick F iy £08. © Sinere, 18.000 on, £5, Recieee ctor. noe ea Convenient to transporte-|,5,cintment call Asbury Park 6730R — Can arrange A, — with less cash FT, suitable for manufactaring. Apply 
Story actory Possession. 5,000 ; . > ahd’ Shopping,’ PP ™ COUNTY — TEANECK sae wir Tie Ker. Also ot : large and small 26 W 3 St. Manhattar 
REALTY + BERGE FAR ROCKAWAY. Modern T-room Woop, "hf a st Lofts—Brookiyn & Long Island 


porches, 2-car|t 
rag * plot ea Saxioo. lana puta lone | worth 
im We ; POSSESSION 60 DAY . orp-tibs 
2Ex100 approx, 4800 24. ft. Wr, Concourse, Frame Owolling “ ‘ho, immediate Senseasion; 611.008./180-39 Union Turnpive ¥1_¢-0000'| «-room colonial home: lst heer, living | iseweter snetion: poner rental. ree} Bree —— Queens & Long Island LOFT, good Yor light manufactaring 8 


eee en oe ew oes eee weooweoes price 
Development 000, ; t 
Dine oo sso be as ‘|98-89 Queens Bivd, Forest Hills sia 3-080 rages vacant space ideal for erecting an-|tenant house and other bul 


Ravina la BUILDING 








# rent 


1710 Avenue M DE oP eses-0490 é-room house, ing 10 rooms, 3 baths, extra lavator -. im 
Z 3448 TIMES ' J B. MacCULLY WESTCHESTER BUSH. IN LOVELY } ss Pann \Dt#med ceiling, stall ‘shower. new ol burn: | arage. in fine residential neigh or hood. ~~ Brook lyn 'WASHINGTON HTS. 20-family, colored; 1,300 8Q FT for office and laclors — 
. &. : ‘ Fully detached i-family home situated broker - owner. $15,000. Call! 400 tt lot by 190: ler os 
MY Madison Ave. MU. 6-7004 | ncy. No [RR station; furnished apt, May i-Oct 1. DE 5-5604.|RA 8-6080 | able _immediately, 
ooanenes Modern 2-Story Building ; $F on stmsemhere % dignity end charm; U 2-5692 or DE 9-4645 = een |wereened porch, Deautif@ a) SEA GA or & perfect summer come, CHOICE CORNERS—Large Profits i, bond 5Q FT toccther with wee machines 
llen Light landscaped nds. Real JAMAICA ESTATES FRO! ; ee . 
Exce’ t e MMEDIATE POSSESSIO [ASBURY PARK Oceepaney June 1.lefficiency units: refrigeration; now renting) Tl apts, 340 sooms. stores: rent $92,000 nar 2.4030 
M leash 100,000 over 3% 10-yr mtg ae VERAL leila, 36 a WW cactakles care. 


Unrestricteé—Migh Ceilings 3 — Bd ay! in | . ; = ——_______- ———— |" "RW GARDENS TERRACE—$25,000 room with fireplace, dining room kitchen. venient, 5-minute to depot & 10 QUENTIN iS (at © {2 84). 715x100, Apari-| Flushing Av, Balyn 
Unlimited Fleor Lead on Street Floor ff s FLATBUSH (Linden Bivd). Cor. Suitable DETACHED CENTER-HAL RICK sun porch; 24 floor, 3 bedrooms and t {l¢/minutes to ocean wis 000 FA — ments & stores: wonderful future. s oH Stores—Manhattan & Bronx 
No Basement—Heat POPHAM AVE., MODERN BRICK & a. - — «4 ‘areas: ae 
\ ens refrigerators a 


nice pice gece y cash. Brokers protected 
Avtomatic Elevator—Truck érive-im 8 rms., 3 baths, 1002100. Poss. $27,500. Parkway Realtors, 8522 Bay Parkway, 
Bklyn. ES 2-5830 


Grossman, 565 5 Av, N ¥, W1 46TH, 33 W. Store available, 4,000 sq A, 
ene Ene W. 88TH ST., DWELLING @ os: ee den a PLAGe 


{!Immediate Occupancy! | bath; 2-car garage: oversized plot. neat | | petra OC RAWAY FARR. 
set on a@ lar tores and N Y buses ce $12,750 
cious rooms. ge schools, stor ENGLEWOOD a 4- Room Fes a 2 separate front entrances 
Will rent te responsible tenant. 
12 rooms, 5 baths. Possession. $20,000. WHITE PLAINS, N. Y. Detached mansion. 18 rooms. 3 baths. 3 


4 es 
and beautifully landscaped piot— Ocean and oa = —---- —~ 
with Hollyw bath, = Goosr POSSESSION JULY 1ST plot REASONADLE SUMMER RENTALS | "ih BEAL” avy" 167, 24 E (Station) SuitaMe stationery, 
Eh iy Finished rumpus exist: 6 bearooms and 3 baths: near 152 Beach 116 St Belle Harbor 5-2004 Scparee 9, 6B =, > K+ 9 Jj L — lice Speciality, RAymond 9-2040 

com bin refr : sunken manufacturt hol 
E 3457 Vimes O'GARA Suitable law office or = lavatories, glass porch room—and front and rear terraces schools and N Y buses. Price $18,500 coarGnsah, new! Pyubullt Hollywood itch tubs, showers, combined heating and hot stores, ful a 
W234 W. 44TH ST i] © S87 commercial business. Apply 28h." street fronts, beautiful lawn ond] | WE etc, d-car garage—gas heat. | Realtors ison A. 
2: , 44TH e ——. oe > ~~ NORMAN 
475 Fitth Ave. M. ¥. 17; LE, 2-267 occupancy; sacrifice sale 


Refrigerator, stair ans hall carpet- GEO. H. BECKMANN, ae a + ge I $1,500 Belle Water system: income $13,200; mortgages! mediate possession. lease. northwest cor 
| Harbor 8: 
& Thompson Realty Co 
—_—___ 360 Lewis Av, Bkiyn. G 4933-4040 6 tra lar Ra 
FOR SALE en ek is al IE "Ir rooms, 2 baths, recreation room, ot/8C 4.3965 and Sunday, Long Beaci Av, Bkiyn, N Y¥.: completely modernized. @FORAGE space available: $13 day, sivack 


58,000: $13,000 cash net returns more ner Burnside-Valentine Av (Concourse), 
MT. VERNON, W. Y. CPAMEy brick, all impr newiy| rooms. beautifully mirrored ag burner, attached garage. For details any GoNTAUK BEACH, ——— 7 {| estimat early ingome $1,634. Phone Mr.| level. vicinity Canal St: ~ 
cro 


Route 4 and Wilson Av, Teaneck, NJ s 2500. ————|than 20% H. L. Heitler, 120 W 42 St “CORNER, n we SM RE Ay 
6,990 
KEW GARDENS HILLS-¢1 available for Immediate possession. Houses and apts for rent. Owner~ 6-family brick cold water flat, Saratogs Sl Nassau St Phone CO 7.5500 
ovements 
brass piumbing throughout: ‘x 


120-34 Queens Bivd. Virgina 0-0208. | Phones: TEaneck ¢-9200, Teaneck 6-0887 | ice wi Lig For rent, possession Jung 1 
23RD ST.—JUST WEST STH extra lava 
ov ; 19,000 +.f. Unrestricted ceptional buy, : $000, Call anytime, G covered Stile Yate pus. & large|broker or call owner, Short Hills 7-3870 ‘gmail cotte 


Balle Hamburg Sav ‘ 
floor, nicely landscaped; attractive resh water lake eithin| ; robable renewal privilege, WH 4-5T90 
DElrecreation room with bar; of] heat; ga- NPRONT, At Aven, W J, benctifell?, nineties @ ocean beach; all utilities; ings Wank, 199) Myrtle Av, Bhiyn, NY. |FOR sale, é-story tenement. tSaled; 3 an- 
ror rice includes all eaential”exthas ocr attractively and fully ferent a pe write owner-bullder u hetaraberarbed Soonty aie fisees, __qpartmnants filled. 
Tater “Tuentnat! heat’ and) SOW El ys cozrentala ooo Go| MODERN brick apt ower) oll heat: rents 
broad} + ey Se - ese 130; expense, $1,843: sell, $25,000. PART siore, $50 mo (pbing. storage’. 


test model Timken silent ofl) 
Piva Forest Hil 0 #-2800| burner: acer carace iawn and laree! i Pannendacter—_ : ———— 18 ,000 cash. Emerson, 136 Willow. Yonk- 25x50. midtown. WA 65-2791 


107-48 Queens Bivd. Forest | Hills —- “ 
arden: first larne  screened-in/ Ot elute eta cottage “prs Yan ee Stores—Brooklyn & Long Island 


SHORT HILLS, NJ For sale, 4 Whitney) LONG BEACH (RECT PROM BANK Inquire Owner, Room a4 
4 St. Bkiyn 


100x100—2 story with romp PIE lane Goer iee lot: showroomeand Til §=industrial Acreage Montemurno, 


Price $155,000 with $65,000 cash. ly and store and basement avail- For Sale —— ~~ - - ——- 
able Ocieber tor user, Price $100,- IJ] oF will build o vel epemidal Mal industry 1"3tamily, house & garage, Just come 


’ ' 000. only. firm i 
21 te saan neding fff torent 'A°voily tae burt I] unset cnr Tan, crew o Wat’ WE 
4, RO McCLESK ka a 
Store lease expires 7/1/46 ABBOTT & ADAMS) | Bank Pidg. og0n investment, 4-family house; ist 
Principals onty | - — Semen mediately: finished basement, 1808 © 2 St 
Bk! 


L. J. Phillips & Co, Inc. a | Howses—Manhatt mmoders S-lamilly house, Guan: 
i" 2 7.930 an 8 Bronx cae: a= colored tile bath with stall shower Bossession. Owner oceunied Asking orice 


«134 West 72 St. TR. 7.03007 |—- --—- _- a | =| tin atbush, for motern 1-famil 
(Greenwich Village). iat wt Lior Westchester “So ory. finished basement and bar, rum-) $5 000 Reasonable terme Premises 








LITTLE N por 's. 4rme living room with lox burn-| in exclus 
piebiart ocd see Ing fireplace; ‘dintne room: ultra modern —— tment Houses Wanted FLORAL PARK. Stores, excellent loca- 
BRICK AND FIELDSTONE BUNGALOW)" wasn. maid's room and wa ae WET PLATSUSH or Eastern Parkway secilon. tion, near station: owner-opr, SC ¢- tes 
On garden plot, 846x100; @ large rooms floor. 4 11 and Rene Wanted modern 1 or 2 family, 6 or T HILLSIDE AV, Jamaica. Store 13uA8, 
studio living room with log-burning fire- fle bathrooms. on, 93. aes, ianricane noun yeoma. a ground floor essential: avail if with full basement, excellent jor autos, 
place: full dining room, mbdern ae a and storm windows. Immediate aout a ed Km dare wit '3- | i guweg jisee, ond ceveasorten, ee pest ae Dates 

ut! erraces i ‘ ler. ; he ry ale 
dard «i billiard a Ba ml ae Bw by wast y, Principal. B — or other see- 144.00 wuleiae owe ~~ 4-200 

an ~~ room with standard size ar thing & near nelpa riarmoor, 1451 Bwy } ; : 
and accessories screened side patio: of 1 | Gaean AY. Avon-by-the-Sea. Tel AP mis. wy ie! M Times oer Names, surtoin. Wanted causes: some, oO _ dine ab = 
heat ara slate roo screens, storm ’ 1 MOonEG LA 3) homes acreage waterfront buyers nto pike allaghe >- aaa? 
windows and Venetian blinds; close to RR tne me Ye. A Bay ss up; shore| salting Seber! at Whitestone 1 : ae CEFYERTS BLVD (Richmond Mill) Ex. 
shoppi ocpomte, ~ aes” ing lfrom Asbury Park Freewood Acres, N J. plots Hermes. YOnkers 3-4196-Ro OWNERS, BROKERS, ATTENTION! ferni shi a. UM bare were, ‘ 7 
on Inter. ay te maica 3.9000, |CAll SChuyler 4-7465 PEEKEKIL.. Rent furnished « sly tot-) We have clients for good apartment Nag r+ Sines ae ¥ 

148-12 Hi rye as i’ kw comes! tage, terrace, 1 acre. screened porch; houses. also loft bulldings, £10,000 iPACE To 
Pedi rront exit 169 St station Houses—Connecticut moder . nen 1-104 = | wife nee an tek ection assured. imately ~I Le. BR 
way ‘4 h rapher 
MIDDLE VILLAGE (immediate occupa "GREENWICH Fer reat, beoetifellp fur- CCKAWO . ° sont, urntehed, ay I5- BUILDINGS. Bhiyn, Queenas ¥160,066 aveil. CO™Mercial modern office bdallding 
5 rooms). Corner 3-family brick, total 4 hed, 10 acre estate, 5 master bed-| Sept SS oF eT able: own . 5 Queens Plaze. IR 6-866 
rooms, Hollywood baths 7 y 3 maids rooms, bath, f2iese convenient Crestwood station | mes ee Particulars. D920 

$9 terms. See Mr library, immediate pos-|$03 mo. Tuckahoe 3-3616 WILL bey U-10 “eal aot hoeas- easel Storss—New Jersey 

Ine,, 40-14 Téth St, Jackson/Otke Vie immer or year. PL s-erid kart $-room furn house, subway! "cash. unit apt house; small ——— NEWARK 

to Oct 3, _Beverty 71-7000 aee_Timee _Dewntowe.___ WEST MARKET AND HIGH STs 


"NE 9-0868 
= — - NEW MILFORD vicinity, Farms, acreage. Pn 
; : L cottages available for _— actori om port , usy thoro- 
§ rooms, 2 bathe, oll: eureqe: —Da_Voe Realty Co, New Milforg. rental, commuting: children’s day camp: | ee Baliings ar aie f ‘soem monscipal builéines’ cite 
ac ot ett ¥ all activities, CO 5-8189 2 “3 Manhattan & Bronx tions to fit tenants: needs given consid- 
Leaving eliy, troom brick, studlo Wing CONVALESCENT Putnam County tikes oma ye - r 1 Faerie Seation._Aibet 2-Bi8 
— - -_ —. 5.0 urner mesenalor 
room; completely furnished. LA 8-4799 agree | ene el 3 demand CARMEL Visleiiy.” 6-reom 0 30 days; sale or lease. Duross, 67S av. 6 Y Otfices—Manhattan & Bronx 
How assau-Suffolk lrooms: 2 tennis courts: asking $07 boo vy Fides Times Dow aorn. : _ Le = (6 Be) S-story busi ba By A eet Immediately avail. 
, | b cons _—— bidg. automatic elev, excellent fo able . 3 N 2.5600 
ATCANTIC BEACH. Beautiful landecsged. furnished; reasonable offers \dered Rockiand County _ high-class retail business: for sale only, Ww vARRES st. cour oPvices 


——_— —FOR SALE—ju2z9s thos seem ta a i 


FOR SALE 2-STORY TAXPAYER, 50x@O | $j/,°%) "ony Firming OR sO oe 


wtin apartment available: low a 
Sth Ave. near 128th | St. Rose Radin-Mor thaw Sores So, iba Vacant—Immediate Occupanc 
900 RAMBLING CALIFORNIA BUNGALOW 


Apartment House | svsire wisn. coe ss 
AVAILABLE To USER abnd Patni ipa ay og he yy A 
529 West L11th St.) yrs sre rome cisnt to cvies | “gf ERS PRE Nafaieat ¢-4718, [shed attic. log-burning fireplace. cheer- 


VAN WINKLE, bu O & CUKER we, rooms. |{u! kitchen. refrigerator; tile bath, stall 
2-car garage: hot water ,heat 


f 4 18 
6-Story, 100x100.11. U6 East tire AL d-snei | Morugnge $10,600 ash 26.400 ee, Sacer Oe 


LONG ISLAND'S BIG 


“rent or sublease lappresl- 


——$—_—__. 





SOLE AGENTS js. -footer, UEENS HOME SALES CO 


" opnits. 6 baths: im~| 169.45 Fiterae Av, Jamaica 
7 3- partmen 
BAS INE os co. Inc. EXCHAN GE : a $90 000. 7 fncluaina at se A — = 5 ee. sat om 


Open Daily & Sunday tos Pr M 


way, excellent 


112 East 19th St, AL 4-T520 ] 509 46 600 og. ft. at 295 We oa aoe 


a Converted AS08 TOINT 

: , v ama amily, 3 « rooms. 

OFFICE BUILDING Madison Avenue for 1200 te d ren bet Rool| garage well-constructed wuceo, sane 

" ’ ‘ . Domed e nice t ine capeeeee, goed tres ransporta- 

| 2000 oq. ft. in Grand Cen- f . Rose faa ~ Morgenthau-|tion, possession of lst floor. Call Mr. Davis 

10-room house on the om possess SAMUEL H. SILBERMAN, INC SPRING” VALLEY, beautiful cotiages, Loomis J. Grossman, 565 5 Av, WI 2-722). Particulariy attractive for Exporters-Imprt 

BLLDWIN Bea nnits ae ¢ aceon anal*2_Main_8t, Stamford ‘tel 4-188.) modern 3-7 rooms: epecious grounds. CORN NER. near City Mail: store and lofts, immediate possession ndlor ‘ 

'’ near village swim n : story en ull basement 28x 108 ful! Space from $150. 
SUBURBAN AND COUNTRY SROren Tee sz week-ends or LU S040 webkdays _ Possession: needs elevat: 7 and rend vatt a Agent on pret 





eal 


ive rqurmnts, ete. W321 Times 


72-22 Roosevelt Av 
ment, L. W_ Tracey, 184 Old Country Ra GEORGE HO roker Z347S Times eq ft, newly renovated office space 
$425,000 Cash Required 4-86 CHARLES &T. Journer. ter colored tile aan. Sener, ati|CORONA. Fer sale, convenientt BROOKVILLE. Center hall cotonial farm Houses Wanted with new furniture, Frigidaire, modern’, ‘ese type building. 15.000 ft to each eheineering architectura “ 
a ILLIAMS ROSLYN 714 buy your equity or title to Californialor evenings ays. P1067 Times Downtown ll, telephone receptionist service 
Central VaHING_» jot TOx105 a car| 
Plot 45 0, Au i _motere p 4 FLUSHING-HILLCREST upstairs; ¢ bedrooms, pt write Geseription and price. L. T. Grimm, | 
|BEAUTIFUL t-rm house, furn, 2 baths, | -~ expiring leases. over $8,000 rent. assets airy: newly furnished BE 
Apartment Geide, 151 W. 72. eae ccens Scar ‘ee rs Dus, train. schols, Moroze, Attorney, S21 5 Av wt yt 4 do 
tg, taxes| house Garage attached. suburban West Bronx. CH 4-0988 SAAS home, mountains, 140 ~gallies! 112,000 ft, 4-story, sprinklered fireproof rental. 630 W 160 3t_ WA T-l04 
Queens and Long Island. Yane June 15 to Labor Day; $1,000. W302 Times.‘oniy Baumeister MU 2-2816 
ly, for warehouse and storage [EAST WaaRX Font Ba Neel eine t ‘as room finished ; 
notty pine with Crafter ceiling and Tile-| 100: $18,500. Broker, JA 6-4296, 4-7 PM |to Suite 2001, 1819 Broadway mg room, dining room, kitchen, 3 sleep-| Times ney. GR_3 
be ' l-fired steam heat epetems, brass plumb- 
sey City. Rental, $300 per yard: near 23ist Bway subway: fon by\fere is an old homestead. now vacant, lernieation.. Herz, 249 W 34th, N ‘o _C._|galow colony, immediate possession. meat: sale or lease Durose, WA 9-300 Offices —Brookiyn & Long Island 
call for « ntment. = 
EXCLUS. jown private dock, asking only $25,000: 4|_roe._ 1162 Nostrand Av. Bkivg. BU_¢ coe Phone 3667 before 9 A M, also eves. lincome: principals + ™ Henry J Preis. a... » Saas 
first) Bernstein, 664 Nostrand Av. NE 8-3770. furnished; lake; 75 miles city. LU | 3-3410. .-——~s “store “Tita 1i8). aie for fae usb ing. at LIRR. 
a! jw |626 Middle Neck Ra Great Neck 3970.|_ cago. furnished house or apartment. 3 to); — if 
NEW DETACHED BRICK BUNGALO CAKE CHAMPLAIN. Former Westport ren ATE leat WW 3 4 5 Ae iid 
floors and beth . tn}tional bedrooms can be provided at addi-\ZONG BE. ~ 
TSly tnsclate to Oct 31, $2,000. MODERN 3-story building, manufacturing Private street entrance. Aporox 
® } Sitioneé heat; very convenient to schools./porch: moderate! toed. East rooms. on ground floor essential a nite Times 
SPEAR & CO.. INC. /tual would be es and heat, ft! afte 'B ay fe ESTATES SUPERVISION. Inc. 19 W 44 St. 
y. 2700. Miller. wws.n ¥ iW. jon sALz. Centinves on Following Page 


MIDTOWN tral district. Z 3366 Times. Betaar Co 2 Jai Be 00 ee 
allable immediately to purchaser ; : 000 | . lake, 8 rooms. 2 baths, 2-car garage 
av immediately h FOR SALE : nest Jackson Heights, NY NE 98-9765 
Garden City 7460 |/$27_ Fifth avy NY C MU_ 32-4358 MONEOE, N J. Modern summer homes, NORTH BRONX. For sale, 36.0@ fi cas llaht waik-up building. downtown prefer 
r x terrace; imm detached 2-family, 7 rooms 4 house; 7 rooms, 1% baths, automatic! lumbing. approx 40 miles NYC, Call ED Moor, concrete and steec! structure. fire- fe al tenant. WH 44848 7 
story Morris Gell MA 4 
ne Bowman 7 ree A iets -0904,|Morris Gellman 
Brexe APARTMENT HOUSE ha Simall private house, ball block HA 4-9090. a aa ceoan RST. & rooms, 2 complete baths! real estate: condition of title immateriai: | ~ Ulster County dates ds 6 PROMINENT corner, Wall St area, 4-story, f 2-6838 
store, loft. office, elevator, 50 ft front. DOWNTOWN, 2 , the 
a heat oe pees half cash.) yacing the beautiful Pomonok Country! —. Owner, 441 Albemarle Ra, *|5052 So. Figueroa, Los Angeles 3, Calif . ished, BR — 
5-6-7 room house, not more than 7 a $800: sell $6,500. UN 3-8685 after 7 PM 
PARK AVENUE CORNER |; 1390 W 42 if celery veliding “= extra sinvati a Plot) tx}00, Price: $14,- fortadle, complete, secluded but 
v . ‘o 
sae eee . ares dies the tile 9 the rooms are large Extra_lavatory ° ce: com bidg. large elevator, 175 Ibs floor load: SMALL widtow® offtce ie share to” tndl- 
i 000 ortgage ment; remodeled; partmen: 
16 sty. & penthouse building, available immediate- | s: wt vy hh with separate glass enclosed stall shower,| FULTON NEAR PENNSYLVANIA AVE. Hillside Av, Jamaica Sullivan County, E BSONX. 30,000 th warene clerator FURNISHED office to sublet; telephone 
| _. , Ay tn GANDEN CHW PK. Mo PORT (671 _.._|DOCTOR will purchase private house, Ei qweweEBOWO VILLAGE. Moass and, 10-year mortgage: price 7.000. rash| Service, ete GR_ 3-788 
4 immediate occu- ae aT =! 
purposes only. Location, Jer- Ti 3- tex ring plus a complete extra ae ATE REC. TONG ISLAND ~ (WANTED, run down or vacant houses,ing rooms, bath, city water, electricity, GREENWICH ST, 425, corner siore and 5 OnvIcE: suitable dentist, millinery, retail 
‘ ing. stair pads and guards very adaptable to modernization, with i 
CHARLES EB. TUXILL €-STORY, below 14 St; $40,000; _— GREAT NECK. Doctors’, dentists’ offices, 
IVE WITH 
bedrooms, 2 baths, servants’ geartve 1] BUY immediately anywhere. See Abe SULLIVAN CO. Rent or sell 8-rm bh man, 5707 Av. LO 5- >cation 
CHICAGO. Wanted immediately, in Chi-. New York State a 6-room apartment upstairs, rea 
T beihs,|5 pedrooms: wil) buy furniture subject to) “yacht Club, completely equipped, at- * OFFICE SPACE FOR RENT 
Reply by Mail year brick veneer 
| third tee, be come — cost), colored tiled bathroom./ homes, eT |FLATBUSH or Eastern Parkway 8 sublease Be 4 . 
ABBOTT & ADAMS: / ce te ne. Dee, nem 1 tetion, spore sania 53-5733 or write — or office, 30x100; immediate possession 2,700 sq ft. 3 exposures. Priced 
225 Fifth Ave., New York 18 “hear me month ¢ p. ab shopping eas transportation Lido Hotel: Pacific Bivd between E Bway|if desired 4-room apt: elevator, Eastern BUNGALOWS for rent, reat, Catch Wits, | ies story oekctoRy BLDG. TES SUPERVISION. Tue. 2D Wy 
; —— = . MU 2-! : rehmont 2 } 


\ own ouse - 
60,000 to 100,000 Sq. Ft. mom sen — ae ‘ : Real Estate Broker 
Rent cost te purchase approx. OPEN EVENINGS AND SUNDAYS immediate occupancy; $18,000. By appoint-| Westchester Greenwich. nearby Connecticut Orange County rice $35,600: cash $17,000. for user only FOR RENT. will sublet approximately sm 
$1.00 per oq. ft. VILLAGE BARGAIN fer. ELE ee snes gl ¥ OTP  coctstsu-ted 3-4 ronme, complete ? 
Princtpala only Between Bleecker & West 4th Ste ase 
H proof Quis modist 5 rooms vacant. For appointment call! neat, Are,2 and stable: one acre CALIFORNIA investor—private party—will 4.987 for further information, mornings greeted unrestricted: possession in ) CHEERFUL reom, senfernished,  tixIf, 
578 Lexington Ave. 2 
ope Ae 4-3113 sult 1-2 fam; acre, brook, n¢ shops ° 
mn Bie Ba very (very tow) 3185 ise 'sT, aE “Yor” Feha blll |¢-troom n detached br -~-+ at ae 4 WANTED YONKERS—LINCOLN PARK + 100 mi n¥ summer 000, cash $30,000, low mortgage. Write ROOM 4x16 or desk space: no phone sery~ 
New homes ready in thirty days Twolold. Have 4-room unfurn opt, 2. 2 baths EAST SIDE MIDTOWN OFFICE, — 16x24, light, “airy, reasonable 
$250,000 Cash | 10,000 ware f. . — 4 CASH for houses, lots, business - 
eet, two-story Oe sleclea Nase: © and well arranged, it has a half tile sci- or *. aa ts bie: 1 bedrooms, magnificent view t , : &. 
a t ; besides entific Kitchen and a Hollywood tile nl“ AROWE ESTATES, INC. 13) secoens possession of entire bide: sale: principals, vidual in office, 10-5. F123 Times 
or W Side, Manhattan: send particule acres of wooded land on high elevation: |$42 : monthly tenants. Broker ga? ‘ Orrice in a oo for CPA or ai- 
ane lavatory. Separate boiler good neighborhoods essential; for mod-igas range. telephone: excellent for bun-| apts suitable package liquor afe Gresses. et 
ils: $5,700. KI 3-5227 Aug. ist. Price only $13.950. For ins 
month. Z 3510 Times. | | Aus y Pee-lacre plot on Long Island Sound with its| HOUSES. all types, immediate cash. oe. = Yor aan ae tr Gaeet meen? on = hac sts ; 
a VINCENT C. FULCO 
| WASHING LL Te 45-04 104th St, Corona. ty 2 OFFICES, 36-23 164 St, corner Dees Rd, 
ll-room brick, 7 rooms available; $9, w 2-5 . 
REAL ESTATE \% cash. AT 9-4017 Yo gene ge IEIAM ERSKINE on ; sonabie offer accepted WI -0760 Oiices—Westchester 
Immediate Possession APPRAISAL |HOUSE for sale, Bronx, 1799 Elsmere Pi.| On large landscaped plot; 4% extra spa- TON, House, € rooms, PA oval. Mullen, BV 7- 
\ | oh frame and stucco, first and sec-| cious rooms and expansion attic (2 addi-| double garage. AT 9-2148 approve " . * /tractivel furnished. modern conveniences! 2-st0ry commercial building. 4.000 s t At Larchmont RR stat 
Ss ——--—- | (Chicago) Harrison 7707. fortable living: private all summer|$26.000, terms: principals only. LA 4-665 ¢90 Ghoteuseth Awibatine tas 7 
ROBERT JOSEPH streamlined kitchen, gas air-con-|ocea t wanted modern 1 or 2 family, 6 or 
Sal amines bon B: Seevele Benes. can Geek and, brick ter: tenes, broker. Z3508 Times reasonadly Responsible tenant 
¥ EALTY and & Walout. Revresentative on prem- Parkway section; weekdays. WHitehall 3- Write for details. Paul's Town Inn, 133 
Tl Murray St, NY TOY. 101-40 Queens Bird, Forest Hills. BO 8-230 ises daily and > Sis8 pie 





Business Places Wanied 
aian. Tb 00 ws Fs. 
ware pede! 2 floors i te ie! 
ba eis as Ohi 
Av, Yonkers, 


Offices—New Jerse 


~~~ Continued From Preceding s 
GRICE SPACE fer reni, 3,506 Scand wien 
avellable June 1: new qnanee 
sor. separate entrances, me oh 
infertor finish to sult tenant; 
pees door; 4 mile from 
Penn station Located at Reisen 
& Villwork Co, Union, N J 
____ Offlees—Other 
MOUNT VERNOW 
(mM Bi mt) 
1000 square felt. suitable 
Manufacturing. office or professi 
. cppeeita reliroad station; rental 
Month 
MYROW L. BLUM COMPA 
COrtiandt 


>| . 
esta 
ferred. 


a AVENUE Tee 


“At Cregsroads 
Superior mail. TEs ave i eefiee 
number 


‘A aD- 


BEOADWAY, TG sesearenes 
pon nat business. $25 sath 


with eption to buy, 10,000 te 
™ floor space, more or less, 
for meats mearielh "p pur All im 
. 


Ar 351, 
with Li “prea 


ue near Hempstead, 


rooms, 4 baths north 
$380 monthiy: 
ie al i 
T Bepesitel 
ee i 


ove- 





pole 
Piano, large studio, north 
eh te =e FEE thstthon, beth, phone; couple. is) — 


° a Ge hr 
baseseal aI MY Wiles. Penthonee—Vervese Apariments — 
the sultadle werohouse 
Feral Seas be lou 


jravire BO » 3046 
_____ Basiness Places Wanted |. apartment ov 
GARAGE (LEASE) dor. 
YOMRAERS—1.300 to 10,000 Sq 7 . & 
Needed for trucks-transportation 40 
State All Particulars * 


rceoss Ti 
PUPORTEN wants space la Wish prleed yy FA. FD 
sift. art whsle-retall store, must have! Professional use; 
amnfe room rear storing reostving | 
Badin , rent 11 type mane, H300 Times 
je only smal type mdse 
—— League, New York 5S 
#1. wishes office space im- 
if only temporary, to ca on 
bilitation work Address Marine 
oom TE St 


I 
for 

~~ Tt -.  WsTt 
Physician's office, two rooms, share re- 


ception room, dentist, street entrance. 
modern el " 


PT ; 
| ideal Paoicten or dentist, near medical 


| Center su 
| guy PRY aol cman 


factitties im seyresentative ons, | 
deveter 6 


between 35-@5 Sts minimum 4 rooms 
st 
4; ci 


_ Ron ot only. Reply Gray- 

ae chare! new 

1 the “te sq th. area want 
ios Se. by ar wo oak reoms 

pring, showroom. peering a 

exehan eT End 

rental ta modgern build! lower a} ee rms, 


Hare StH at Tos! 
E San ee ee. El weetdare 
rent TIOX Noa Tor OES regyauner. 6 


itt machinery & parts; Manhatten, | hy preferred. Call after 
Side, below T2d: street level, drive-|¢- 3561 oP mM, ar 


bari ie eet Times eae my aa Patani 


imes | 


Si ne 


aa 23 St & T2et at — Bs 


En eterred. be manele ur) 


and. stock: 
— Ba aa 


1.500 to 3.500 needed: will her Piller tiv 


Favs tte Call 11-3, 6-6 
Sealed V WV —veleraa Seales toll, HR he 8 "pei ww 
re-establish 2%-year-old concern; Ught | - 


nufacturing tillmen, 334 Rockaway) unfurn 
rkway Brovklyp DI 2- yes Manhattan, Cosive rent 
—! or building, 1, A Westchester 
bt mfg plaster aneer no machiner, Manhat partment. 
af share ® '¢ y N tn a * t. AC 


Pimentel! Ww re Bt os 6-0990 
TRE need store, 1406 fi, lt mais Porm Seraecen toa 
efter? Py ner. “eal 


cake distribution, Williamsburg month. 
pa. Pe bia i768, Wash! 
erman Cake Exchange.“ EV 17-8300 


off teyer 
vine’ rome 


~ ghetes! 


&pc 
Just 


rooms, 2 bathe, mid- forces 


Have 4% . 2 
room 


wu 2-37 for 
th “Ts 
midtown. 


tum = 


or 
for 4 
. FO Lye 
. Beene no 
wo . 
vic, for 3 rms & bath, unfurn apt) 
W Philadel WITl , 


. living seccommodailons, 
for veteran and wife. combined with of-| . 


fi space. I eta a office furniture 
Lort or 2? with 
—s 506 to 1500 


& 424 Bt meee & 


loft or store about 500 
@enufacturing between 
bes share space. 

DESIRE subletting, ren’ 
. "office — gy a ax for - 


pprox — 
wording ‘Jentn section. 
Washing oo "Het me J 
To i: 
at 3 2,500 
ther 


tealres Fm 
| ® enhouse 
Garé 5 a Rim west, vs 


4 a. < 

pet nhs _| fura, NCE re som op, Fe 
es Manhattan. | uN: = . 

U" "pide 23130 Times | house, unfurn, " idealt ay 


mm... located want 
tel loft wanied, any loca Jon come or larger within 1 br NYC. 
suitable for light Jewelry man uring 


r Times rate My eca  5e TeS* 
b ‘ ~ 


high 
4h 


AU 
=. ee_unfurnisheg "exchan-» for for 


ow tt. between 6 Ay. 


close | office 


furnished 
Y Citure 


mi¢town =, erred, 235 to Penta: 
er unfurnished. W405 "rimes fe eu 
$ of Po Pp of Sth, up-|™. 
to or alterations ark, St up- 
wn. H436 Times onture . 
ENTAL otfice or apariment spnee wanl-\Ve-non 717-4099 
ed 


— 


in A 
+ 


. for 1 or 


“Treom 


‘or fa Lt ester suburbs. Mt 


Uae neal 2 rma, B teibe. 


Bence, 


, eon & 


, reasonable, & 
sw St, for ba rms, Manhattan- 


Bronx = - M. 
. - 
x 


. section $58 per month for 


oston. LFiS 2 im 


pou Stiva, or Long Island 
th ; 
SAL OFFICE” | weak sNBthe g 
For publishing firm, midtown _preterred | high floor, aint 
veterans about $50 Fd02 Times gest or Genital PEW = 
LOFT wanied. F506 to. B04 vg 7 val (Pah NGE staan 
able w oe ie mqpatoctartas Manor Glass, 33th & Medison 
. “YT Lense we cab Wor Rectawey er Leng Beach 
baring an"? ship’ = yo Bt. 
y $500, below cell 
LOPE te loans Ebay te 10h os ei nn 
yy Oe ‘immediate occupancy od ree paceman 
me TO w76é T 
co eet LIS acl ier 
ae = tS f and 
rent or ‘te chare Geld- Crest Ls 
‘662 2 AY GR 35-2145 i 
gxvecrive requires approx “ft 
office space Rockefeller Center, would 
consider subleasing: best ref sie 
LOFT wanted, 1.060 Ti, mildiown, aa 
on will purch fixtures Ag ewelr 
©, 22 W 15 St. CH 2-8 
“LOFT WANTED, TO aPNT 
, midtown Manhattan; 
va kk. $229 Times 
. possibly t rooms or sw part 
=> loft; pay for alteration; section Bway 


ownte 


. yy Tw 
ment n ‘preterred 
ten ie “ae very Wahi WAVE: == . cee 
manufa er ng mes MW need a coasts or 
BENT space or two benches In Jewelry/NYC. or suburbs: evenings UNIv_ 4-4421.| 
t i512 Times aeace| MOM of 3-4 rm enfurn new garden) 


eR: Tse apt, Nutley, setter sea 


Curate, etc strife. i. 
service migigen. sme 6-41 


apt 


i608 


airy 


ars protected. Pi) 


ate maintenance: : 
ed Ba! Wm. A. White & 
0700. Hopkins, __ 


une 1 to Sets | ig 4 speaeeene 
fees asirw.y 
nt Sy ative tte 4 i 


Tssthhg R 5 wen: room for indy 


reok 
—__ on kiyn | 


rooms; price 83, 
Sth per month immed ‘occupancy. Pi 


| Apartments—Queens & Long Island 


it iv EARt- 


aete Lin due rset’ rep- = Selecting . Tenant ig 


tern- Broker 
T ares. =A Masicon Av (Toth froth 4 St). REgent 4 4-7896./ 35 


room 
tamford, Myf e. 1-8 Unfurnisned for rent up to $75 month, 


self, 
where in or within one hour drive of} 


New York City; am permanent civil serv- 

; ice empleo . 

collect. Co- Hae 
REFINED 


= pis 
wa Las 


om et 

pair will get iy 
7, room midtown furnished apt: 
month 5-6173 


war he 


mote 


ENGAGED rewns, 


to get marr married; furnished er 


_|RETURNING Bed Cross 
Desirable desires furn-unfurn apt, 

neighborhood. for apart-|rent or sublet 

fore 10 or after 6 


PhON® WASHINGTON, J fern, wafers, tor ¥- ie 


iT fants : i 


a5 hes VET and rie, demergtay_ nerd Soratenes ceenlines: Uf 
cartes | Pom VaR AE, some store * gt, + som ings at 


‘| BUSINESS man & wife need apt, Menhat- 
tan, to $100, min (1° yr lease. 


RN 
fi a 


es 


s 
Furnished Rooms Wanted 


ottenent a aeanater fu = 


would. like jo board with « 


‘ ony. 
0 room, i ‘ter, 6, care of ee. OFT 
. ® suburban 4 


GIVE FULL FAGTS 
IM ANSWERING ADS 


Board PUT 
awe cee wountty room © 
board, round. $90 weer 


Wanted 
+ EAT” Foe: rog sparen eal 
sera | snd sft rept mor se 


need 3-rm unfurn ; iy 


des Lely” need “apartmen 
riments of Verious oe 


Fray) 

rooms 

m3 eereney_— 1 WERERAN and papi ae 

terrace, a ee Saree. rsenly need ig 

asane Henares reams, Weal Ge pal woarried, SY IT CHRD 
EY Fee torkes- —— hem Fase 


— % iifesd 
A 1-510, 
Mo 


A 
— 





anes Haart: 


BSAA ren” A 
Sytner bath. CO 7-9408 BM 


ERAN So, hi ern guy ARM ORE 8 


or 4 . 
< una 3. WOOME; WG EY heavy exec dead to 
CHILDREN. F18 trues eel BRCY Aa ¥ Agcy, 8 da, expd 


st | eet ) Sk il ser 
own 
wile, ee ee, 

_Tooma. Ne collect PERO 


cY- .. to Art Dir, Adv Agey 
. Behooi ‘ 
riments & Rooms to Share 


Price 
tractive apartment 
ofessional woman; sterenaes excha 


Wit EV Ay; vet Vaciness mal 2 
room apt with congenial Ly 
weekly. See Mr. Alicn, 

After 4 PM 


oe “Art sia 


W 46) floor front 
share her” ae og an 2 Matte, 2 oS to 2: me! ae 
430 Times 
YOUNG business lady share lad 


men Brive a Goldvers. 


PM oes 
youn apt; Manhat'n; refs 964 Times 


____ Apartments Wanted pm Ky aus nell tin "Tie a 


Furnished %; mit cr 
71a 


lor T reem 


THE PAR 
! 5 carrying char 


Downtown 


Furnished oppty 
sia + amp. © 5 de ” u 
ts, Tens con oppty 


ay ‘analysis jem 


2) Sa 
. Oppt 


a, 
lo Cory WTR advis, 
on. 


Typist cies § 
slectrinatic 2, bill 3 
— _ casi 


| REGENT, 299 es. eg “a 
q STENO, attr, legal,, alt Sa eee 
Sis. R —_, attr. art studio ; 
Be trainees, alvtene 
Pool Cars & Vans 
also special Air-freigh 


9G) STENO, ‘wnat flings nirline, aces 
Aket to ae one. ¢ & . 
paras point in re tokens. Just con “ot pen outne, iw “Bk 
coviee, store CLERKS. file clerks bate - 
Us AV | CT 7-671 [GEER a, Ce many 5 day $35- 
TAB mach, key punch, Burr, M-H$30- 
@oving. ocacking, shipping (CLK. begnr typ. learn swt 


coBsWwin 
7 F 42D ST ROOM 410 
ADVTG PROD ASST, exp. copysettin 


PAYROLLS SUPVR. factory and clerical 
eap, under 35 yre 
CYS, 3. radio-mag, medical . $50.58 
EGAL SECY. midtn, 5-4 $50 
ASST COSMETIC SALON DIRECTOR 
chic. under 30 
PUBLICITY ASST. sm sten, radio 


SECYS Are. mage pdish- -rad, 5-4. §35-40 
PAYROLL CLEna, midtn, 5-4 


ASE! 
ret veteran, ¢@x-army air, 
> camtain. urgently needs two-bed 
partment or house, furnished or! 7 
rite ama 6 -old son; any-| moving furniture i ——" tance, 
an, 


out 60-year service your guarantee 


Engel Broa, 1819 Bw co 5.5160 
MIZE Tend ie any part gE UBA, sher- 


w''S st, mae. ENS 
TAMALL MOVING JOBS” 


‘ | ENDI COTT EXPRESS, tac _ EN 23-4900. 
porecees i Rooms—tEast Side 


$100 
~ de Single rooms i ites 
oie tee sl 


ney 


can ER best of ref 
188 Times ~<a 


Kk ond cos 
eee tate ae email 
“3 


no coon aan, tan 


lette 
Eigiabed an 
3s ey AY iopp City Mall) - 


qv mnaae; 
lg and 


from 98 


= 
tay 
me 


¢c preterred. 
Jackson ee 
tvate beth: s oF 
ws60 month. Blanche 


gy 2A ye F < 
offices: ex aur 
gy yA 

fees ; some ma ait 


_ am 7. ‘ 
RAY See agent on premises, 18 M si 
arr Law STEN Diy and how 
protveslonal 84TH. ‘i. 40 E—Waralabed room for genile- 4 S prere. pa stene, x ae 


man, $346. Supt red esa 
siti 


MOTH, 120 &. Large front parlor, monthly 
furn; bus gentieman. Mrs. Smith 
or wofern- LAST BIDE. Large, clean, attrac front; 
g veterans;| refs; gentieman, AT 9-Se78 0 


me eee Furnished Rooms—West Side 
couple, quiet, 2D, 155 W. “iiantord Hoiel™ pay 
mot references renee, need apartment) AY sub): daily rates 
unfurnished 


beans: 


if Vn vga 


to ass 


| nicel 


yerertia 


and responsibie. 


EDIT 
weekdays, N. asst bkpr (2) 


SEC-8 
FR-ENG Gecy, steno, —_ 
-stens, ener, pani = 


up 
sten adv, © - 
curcul ctk, Be. coe rel eae 
system, 


SR St ata company, 5-4 rs 
T, = yell al. cuee iie-40) 


FILE cik, clk ee at 
TYP! sten, di 
aa 
100-1 GD. cor 6: 

Maa Boon EET ins wae ye 
4 ISTANT 
*|Good op 

ny diversified 

erks-typists 


“snd Wile Want tmall ap, Tar 


space: 0-6 
Maureeth, : 2 
a a ta te 4-137 
‘ulton ( all) yn 
‘RIGHT OFF BWAY ten (ere lad) 
Sectys-stenos, 5-day $45 
Typists. irn d@ictaphone $38 
Oprs (plug-moniter) $90-¢35 
PAYS FEE ON FOLLOWING 
Stenos gr 4 4 to $45 
Ciks, file, ete $25.630 
Dictaphone oprs 
Ciks. typlate 
HoRN AGENCY 
505 5 Av (423d) 
Sectys-stenos. several: attractive o 
ings advig, theatrical, ing. 
Dr's office $40- 
Receptionist-stenos (3) . . §30- 
Bookkeepers (3) sees 
~| Typiste-clerks, several - 
-Rand bookkeeper 
112 


BRETRS x 


many others 
¥- 


il leven. ve, f e Ofes, B-da...... 


phone, geni 
Chin pro Pex 
13 W 434 


$4 
ALSO 2-ROOM 8 
ora, inv w 
HOTEL ASHLEY 
"In the Heart of Times Square 
Convenient to Everywhere’ 


I will furnish hn effice furni- 
es . 

worker 

pape 


SH 5- 
1-2 
eta 
furn-anlern, urgenily needed, 
et executive, veteran: Manhattan Spotiersiy Clean, Double Rooms 
AShland 44-9910 |PRIVATE BATHS FROM UP 
yoom api, furn|A FEW AVAILABLE AT WEEKLY RATES 
downtown 477M. 114 W (Woodrow Wilson Aindios) | 
3 Seorveomns Practically jd 1-2 rooms.) 
gub- kitchenette, showers; reasonable rates. 
| ota eT, te W. ~ 


CH 2-2400, 


co 


— A, sublet or rent 

or Manhattan. MU 2-035 
“business exvcutive, veteran, 

.. oo 


yoom apt 


a PERSON 
twa) MO 1-440 

MIDWAY" 
Room 


Phone in Every 
. SeCENG 
REDUCED FR 
DAIL FOR 2 PE 


races, aie private P cali 
HION Publicity wrtr 


sade I ee "geniier eman; FAS oe ad 
6. Maainet on ‘orivate! -EATURE wrtr, women's 
rh. gonttenssa. COPY wrs (2) ach teach 
ouse. feoTH. 201 W (6D). Light, eee gen- See YS-advtg, 
. x Het ha we 
fit 


owiy ity. etc & ga Sai 

iar ap 

ml sare a a ac mae tie a 
Spee te oe oy am firm, tmidtn. start ‘May < 

ee tee tp BET Pe 


| - 


or sublet, BU_T- 
NE pile: one child, caro 


eee os 
Teena Saree arcs, aps 


See v. «x * ettrective:, 
SECY. publishing. promotion. 
SECYS. social w — are. 


lath floor 


on, ith Call 


Furnished Rooms—Bronx 
MASTER bedroom. banlates ‘couple, Kiieh-| 


on privileges optional; convenient trans 
atl weekly, LU 71-0108, evenings : 
Furnished Reome—Breeklye 


“0 7 be! : mNER ™ aT 
|Bkors. F C. diversified 
Clerks-typists-asst bapre 
_ fatenes some sectyy 

PrUsLaBURY, 3g & @ 6ST. 
STORE Mer-« way "Fide 


vr SBE os eee 


isa Ww 43 ST ROOM és 
A cosy rendesvous for dandy jobs! 


} 


SY 7-7904. 


Ay- 
lease. hy 


4. 


Rr 
LOW RA 
For reservations MA 23-6606. ST 3-#210 


) 


te a. type crema, Thee 
. with-wout tend, B- 5-4. .$40-45-00 


Ty? : 
irist. = * 
CLES, bgnrs, exp. many 8-4a7..428 to al 


. $35-ges/ealart 
mi 


$300 OR ROUGHS Bookkeeper 
Stexoc th Gece pet, 4 


to $4,300+! . 


ROOM 164 


yn, nD ee 
nee 


T. 
EDNA MAE KING 
MANAGER. FEMALE Sor ABT MENT 


L 
Sportswear buyer for N ) AE 


of outstanding de *, uw 
{drarian ~o City 8 Kos 
sd 
a. D4 
eno, Sd 


le metal 
Blas oni 
kkeeper, asst, day 
ascy. Sd 
. fine pe sa 
. broadcasts stud. 54 


nY ade. ry = Pas 


with steno, 5-d. .§30-40 


aaa  poiae, bkps, oppty 

J, a. 

L' stehosy Manh-Qns, S-4. $40-48-50 
Hn. heh “3 


ork 
town mis *+ 


ono. goed co 
secy, auf! offe, midtn 
gecy anide pe, some sherm 
’ gsi offe, 8-4, midtn 
, oa ak Jew! 434 


t . 
swhds, 
mimeo, sincl cutter, 5-4 
knidg steno, some 5-4 - 
, clk, advtg co, midtown Heed 
steno, intretg wk 160 
Manhat, 5-4 $35 
tm: 5-4 

Italian, Pr-S 0 

thicem, 5-4 o - 
4 $12: full-tm.325 


Sales clerks per tame’ 
Promotional trav! re 
Converting records 
Hostess i 
wkkeeper, ma 
gure clk. © tenant 
cy, right Rina to exec | 
ty to ¥ p. Radio City 
7 toa partner rae 
° ty mer ener , 
ohh froe ee 
° research or ch 
. A advt 
ing co 
, young rl ofe, 54 
a. day 
, personnel asst, 5 day 
Irn personnel. 5 4 
. Feceptionist. § day 
. Monitor bd op. 5 4 
Swhd op. recep, to 30 yre 
Dictaphone op. midtn. 5 of 
or. 
5 


meter op. midtin aol tame Chaat oe 


Burr £2300 op midtwn. 
gays. "oh 
to 10,0004) Kaen, or tep. 


BS SUBEEESSSSSS 


pt-time. 


ErENDABLE 
NR BWAY) 


OF OPENINGS 


EMILY Bee oat 
41 
mother Co is ‘4 


1l_ WEST 42D 
1 MERCHANDISIN 
U Buyer better dresses Midwest 
Buyers hich class spec shop exp. infant & da 

child NY): fr rtwioutn) access(outn)Open| Asst bhpe-t; 
Buyers NY (1) ling (1) infent&child Open nat'l co 
| Store Mers. chain exp NY & ents te to $00) Kant Pie as 
|Ruyers sests store mars and a 

MEDICAL- PROFESSIONAL pened) 

x ray ne exp ” office sono 

" or Suover ospt 
Dietitian ADA exp." GOSD Asst bkkpr, know! spaed 
\Mer-Direc Lt helh resort, ‘maint+ sooo Git, real et $35, 8 
\Mead Makor  ¥ hospit maint+ 1800| Assistant cashier. | = 
Pecord Librarian. Bkivn.hospit exp. te 2400) 


\M 
rys, lab & X-ray tech in NW OY 

¢ N ta Toupltal vate offices, Mesrier 

Tf interested in jobs | S19 8 Av 

|secretarial and conaral office “work ok (A ant, expd. menial 


see 
our Placement Managers wh jmaint. Rivererest Sanit, 
‘ at samen Attendant, bith club or 


lal, tips 
Aaditor-bookkeepgr 


ilo 


now! steno 
MU"sans 
E: steno, 


NOS, 
BKKPS, textile. appl 
3 pobbers, a 
RS, man y 
5 KKPRS 


iT B 
ICAL 
AYR 
UG 


Pennsylvania 


$30 


these fields 


ry i 
_CLERICALS! Y typlots recepte! 
LILLIAN -K- CERVICS Ln LILLIAN SMITH 
475 aii mate we. Pr _, A me BLDG. |Secy manage small sales ottice 
EN ne © bkepr, commercial. 5 da 40 Secy 
“—e, to ci led 


simple bkkpg 
pases. M Bt.. 40 Secy 2d steno college grad, major oline 
billings, 8 da phyeh or guidance 
hens most 5 aa Secy 


steno mdtn, ait Sat 


w “rn 
, = ' 


Me Henry, BA 7 
Z hs, oF 


he i Becroughe, h, 


ra nee elerk-iypist, ox 


. yng. adv dept, publishing PY 
wna Bir _S-day | pat 


Seite Position. 5 days 
igecr Radio City. 5 days 
Stk ee serv field 


oe Beak se antn tS i tr 
9 “idee gs 5 days 
Previnus ~ 


kn ft 
joyment in le Trin, helpful ole 
yping, supervise trping aii 


fice asst 
service burea 
whd oper, kn “typing 5 days $% Aillin 
erk. En typing. beginner "% days ida hr: $35 
ELLIS SERVICE Billing checker, 
|300 S Av (42) 355 © 1469 (Bx) |oppty. Mr 
PROMOTION writer. statcl bkgrnd. pub- (Billing eth, 
ar ot adve onp res & samples * “vise 5 St. Bkn 
i pan-Ene dict 
tae! 0] Beng cla: ‘total, ay hl 


wer. ene. kool bkpe, advtg exp 
ety~st high e 
cerry sone, real ettte ee ede es {) wittlng clerk. Burroushs, 
|SECTY-stenos, many irs & ers 
|aPe steno, Heht bang. *%-da 
TYPIST-bdiller, Washnatn Hts, 
ISWBD oper. monitor & vlug to 40 Bill elk, expd, NCR 
oe ke noe Manh, kosher menu..Open Savoy Plaza, Rim 390 
‘ kkpr or‘*ham s~o 
\CTRC filing. publishg co 5S-da sennd © coensesedl 
Rees attr. 30 yre. 5-da 
ESP. repid advemt. 5-da 
50-11:30. mdtn. 5 nts 
anre & expd. top firms. te 
Svsinees eee Year 
Ww 4D w 


ce 


wt Sieve attr, 1 cata 


t clerk iat. man 
aa Offics ciks. Tiens. te $28.46, 
LYNCH EMPLOTMENT skRVICE 
1 PARK ROW COR ANN 8ST 
SECRETARY, Wall St $50 
EX 8 
to 


SECTY. ‘Labor "Relations eececceces 
ABSTRACTOR 

CREDIT CLERK-T 

OFFICS sete; o2e0eee 
TELEPHO OPERATORS ......- 
RECEPTIONISTS -— 


cas Billing Alerk. 
5-da tm Brush. GR 35-68 


clerk. ¢ 


se tach alert eet are 
leasant xen 


to Yo 
loniter 


interests 
meet execs 
. Balyn 
. midtown, 9:30-5:30 
summer 


4 . $2 exp 
tor, outside contact, write fine law office 
exp zine 1S sey. Steno, theat. Radio City 
. y.. 8175-9199 sRCy-Sten, publ career, 5 “a 
port-import, midtn, 6 day $173 sxcCy.sten Span corresp, day 
. advig, pub, &-day Bir Secy Sten. asst editor 3 *- 
midtown 14 RECEPT-Steno, theat. oppt 4 
$120-130 RECEPT.Typist, Monitor, films, 5 4 135) 
eran Plug Bd, some typ: penthseto § 
hte C Asst Sten, Palestine org, 5 tity r 
COMPT. Op 835: EF Riller 
|RECEPT-Monitor, light steno 
CLERKS typ. train for ef" 
t school ber ' 
a nace 10 7 a 7 7» me a 
_ personali friendly service Leese Nol 


EAST 42D 
EXEC secy-rectp. rapid. 
; Pa a 
° must 
ne 
$0 | 


0 93 minder a oal 6 
es 


lols. PC, 
Be | ewreley. $40-*45 start 
rp |atbor. FC, 5-day, 

mfg concern 


2 Bookkeeper on. 
nt ‘ 
tan. m uty Aare knowl 


eens CAMPBELL 
Room T14 
‘iar 


“4 ree agey exp Sal+ expd 
PIsT, advert's. radio 


3a fk 


fai charee, 
full _detalis. S627 
exp pd, full char 
4 Av, 4th 1 


Bhipr 

imate. 
Whkpe, 
Ine ta 


a * stay; oa 


NOS. CLERKS. STC. 
& BEGINNERS 


men bd oa 
srs ber pala 


Dr-asst, “accounts 
start pleasant surr 


mol 9-5: 30 


pa) 


Simpex Co. 1564 Bway 


TY bdiller 45 
SECRETARY to personne! director. 40 
SECRETARY. advertising career... poo 
MONROE CALCULATO We have 100s good posttions with out- 
RECEPTIONIST. light menes standing firms, many for $-day week. in) 
FILE CLERK $33 |the following fields 
PIST $32.50 [MOTION PICTURES BLIANING 
RVATION CLERK. airline $32.31 |aDVERTISING alin 
RTISING trainee $30 BST AuING TE 
RD, om typ desirable 130 ANKING 
at. CLERKS os oY RADIO 
cous AGENCY EXPER! 
wv mast at : n ROOM 410 
Seviens to 1 or by « 
SECY. exceptional jod for quaitted con- (56 West 429 Street 
fidential secy to pres, large midtown come, Tuesda Le 
firm, 5 day 5 tional Listings 
SECY to Personne! Director, new div 2 | Bookk ‘tom steno, exp import, 
ti firm, midtn, 5 day dio City, 5 day 
to Acct, midtown. 5 day {00 seer -steno, pers director, merch 
| St to Dir, market reech, mdtwn 194 | Secy-stenos, Emp 
BSECY to Sales Mgr, midtn. 5 day $173| Secy-stenos, expd expt. Rad City 
SECY to Div Head. around 30. dtn.5d.$173/ Openings in radio, advertising, publishing. | Lesear VC, t-airt 
STENO ony office work, oppty learn —ereenene theatre film, for secys ‘oe? 45 Al 
ort $150) stenos pists, switchboard operators, |Oomen 
TYFisTs aoe & expd $130-$200)_ clerks ealery range 25-850 |Bhpr, full che ently; 5 


JR Ciks, mid-dntn, Sd. advemt. optys.$135|~ GOLDGEIER, 1472 Bway (ear 42 gt). | Tissue, 100 Putnam Ay 
ELIZABETH EWERS Bkkpra, 840-555 sts, 830-940; Plughd Meokheeper, 
18d NASSAU 8ST Cot oper, $29; Typtats $36. Clericale $26.45 x00d salary. 


ECY: French dictation Bookkeeper. some ene, Ch 
RCY-Bteno: Span-English dict Hotels and Restaurants palance. Pro 


qreseete Gem Spas $40 BKPR. UP-STATE 


$35 to $40 SECRETA at] 
BILLING Clk Knowl Spanish 5-DAY 
FILE CLERK nak cae @ CASH, NITES 
-D ITIO 
t 1907 


3259 Phene Gl 
#0. 4 


AGE 
Es 
Flatiron Bidg 
17% 5 AY 
Desirable positions too numerous to Net | 
now availabie 4 being listed continually 
o 


for office heip every description, execu- 
various industries, liberal|— 


a V;-4- Paramount. 


Fe ed 


ee te wpe. 
_All_ classifications, Relief, private, $12 
Help Wanted—Fomale 


M4 Acelg oF bhps student, 4-5; no Sal} ncel’s * Bk 
$45 oft: opty, state — sal W351 Times | wi 


R cai ex 
PTOMETER. © Penars & 40 ‘Accountant, asst ollér apditing| 


#7800, Sd. $40 <ietements, gd opty. $40. 23002 ‘Times. 
435-45 Addressors, . write, cur mach, 


type 
de” _Times 
wl ‘os 147 NASSAU ST 139 Addresnograph-¢raphou we carty Wite’Tim 
opperte- Hkpr, able manage 
4 --X, -- AS PF, ofa9 aities dn te ne Own. | ale with Sbility, Wie 
to PM- Peis Boctar's. 
os thie 5 er 


tive & clerical, a. 
AN an AGENCY 
on St. (non-Sectarian 


English-Spanish sin write ets 


“pe airh 


WA 5- 
Bikpr, FC, 


art nie as He . 
ty a ° 
' Export 

500 Ade mer, Malley Co, fcen Wa 


A Malai! tee 


480 ‘Lex AV 


pone er 
ant asi hes Serre 


Thee _Don't phone. | Coit 


Gi, ee Al 
ove a 


ee gre Be 


ay Taw “i 

CO T- $24 Thurs, - "| Rubber °°. a73 5 AY 
-. tretness ‘Alteration eel ys 
t 


ise. a: | irate 


OR 4-1455 


| Alieratlon 4 
5 Beekman St (nr City Mall). Suite 628 ay g 3000 Lon Flight Shoe, 241 Tantte 


week 
Syn all day 
Sectys, Billingual Sectys, Stenos 
Bakprs 4 Aeee Typiste, Clerks ieithin it ened air 


y workroom. Dix- Rookkee 
— ‘op_Sqlarias!! ———-  SVieratlon hand, dresses, eapd, ems omell eep. 
Ds Ata et ortunity: steady Rosewel),_ i W Mth. Bx $50 
Vv, AT Viewty : 
e robsohneh eer sa! Selma alg 15 i —- 
| head, expd fine real a wsaes 
joer 
Tha B'VAY Alfrtm hands, thorly ox 


ands, ox 
WwW oT 
Wega ea iy, 
. ¥ 
Open 5 dajs, ed pay. perm 


salary 
| re ae one. 


vA ‘iam tae, ed 


MGRS-Assts, RTW chain 


nt. W318 


mo 
pr. 
\Stre, 679 Van Sinderen AY 


“4 interesting opptys for med & dental Asst housekeeper. — emp 
drewes, ae work, Lith Fleer,| Bi 


Goodwin Gym, 1457 Bway, 424 \dey wk J. M Schiff, Rm 709 
. knew! steno; 
experience. Write details, RR 300 | 
to sales mer. midtn, 5 days 340-445 Bil eth, eset, sale F foods, exe opty: $95-|Bkpr, asst, od sal. Hotel ofes, Tit W Sint 


wa 


- a Mercer, est 


i. expd, sceurnie; $35, & 


enqert, “haar. 


ert. typist, knowledge slene optional | tur 


5-0088 is 
clerk. Knowl sieno, excel oppty; te 
Piasea Mille, 444 4 
dook pubitoher, 
Levin, PL 35-4761 


Elliott. Fisher 
(nr Williamsburg Bridge 


to by d. pleas off. American Sponge, 4° Ann Bt 
a eee 


pepe: 
5 
igi raniiere, 6 AY, 


writer tanae attehmé, 
5 days, WA® “i 


athe oT Cana! 
lle hee, 
Sa. W325 We’ / 


set steady GR 7-779) 
>, Binger | sewing machine; 
585 E Tremont Av 
table work, stltehers; good 
Claydon, 200 William ft 

1-glrl offtee, 


2-girt office medium, 
Progressive. 
steno, expd, B days; g@)|*” 
restaurant exp prf bet 


|not essen, $40 week+ lunches, $343 Times [opeieer. 
email 


8a Niet expat rel retl oree vie, 


ae + oe eo 
star 
full charge; 


7. Me at 
tate, Rad City $40-$43/Biker, slene, S-da wh, O10) motion plet | 


espd, full char 


$0 “MILES eeptATE. BY AGENCY, f aA ‘wk <" wand, ‘ = io. 


regs soot have exo ry 
Pea es 308 Ca 


408 T! Times” 
open, 23372 
Ine oper. “aed Model 


perm, 5 ¢ 
Pr Uppin small i-girl office; 


Typist, thoroughly exp only; 
| fine oppty; $40 $45. Elenite, AL 4-4264 


ofce, sal commensur- 


William St 


ay.\Bhor, exp, whisle crocery, FC, ; Ta WE estate office 


SS al smertthi, expd. 


Ban Held 
ordham Un, Keating Ha)! Clerical 


“y Cc, emall ee i. ZF 


ny 

4 pad.craft 237 _W_ 3 
Watt a red mee, ¥ 3 a ca 
Wa" re eae: Bape-stene, FC o ee, We Le Emby Dis. ment 


a 
~~. 9 


Call BR eit. 


rs. 


ae 


oF pegs ae w ean = en mip, Sort Seat Se +942) 


vey Poy 
Shari 


we AMP paricuia 
eakor, ee i 
pal = airs a « a 
7, baa wt. pr. expd, =—e oa 


1 hooe. 


; jee M El me cnr =. 
: -| fate Rie ar, whoo 


hia Te be Ds 
pr-steno, 


fone tara 


Pes eed Write Box oor Lead 217 Tth av 

* part time . arom mfr. 
Ws has 'detniis ti leter, W285 es oe 
oveky 249 


Sethi N “se * 


— whi full trail, ies 
Edwards & Senith 4 Wall 

| yt 3 ae 5 days, 5-5; iit” week start 
AY 12 pu : St, ith floor 

. Es caasi 
ay (eth fi) 


ithe ' 
av Ban DLS zits tes 


+, knew! sane, Ure 


em rae mate ity A ee Times 
ecping maepine Underwood 


¥’ Times Bui: Baiyn. exp Haan iota see me MU 3-978. 


wt professionel |Beokh 
organization, $130-§140 Piss mes Dntn |$40 piokonnt oan surroundings 


mm 


sur Book keepers. -asst typ. conguata! ailee, r 
hr wk. alt Sat AM 
. NOR 21006 opers 


EV 
tar pest. know! 
full charge, 5d. e@ wl a GR 35-0800 
inst; fan Rookkeeper, expéd. know! a typing; $40- 


AS 4-08 $45. permanent 
beauty pric exp; | Bookkeeper, complete set, port, 54 
Soe, 1a Bway 


of, not e- 
ws.er 


or 7 


Bkpc dept trainees, t 


sen; 5 4. 40 hrs De 


‘Fumes nna 


|Bow ties, “exed opers, bat the nm & 
| “A aumens Bow use 
5 

pleasant| Rreakiast hosiess and lunch walires; Sen 
{f. Miss Mills, Motel Merald Sq. 116 W 34 
|\Rerroughs bkpe meh 91100 expd oper, 54 
oa Harlem Sugar Co. 101 Bruckner Bivd, @x 

days. |\Burroughs #1106 opernior, know! Fx 
lhe i Fata anal - 

urroughs 
into <a 


oe will teach; 04-4) erma 
305 ith AY (28) . — 


5- ure. 
4- 1856 eK: w 


xpd inriot 
urres oper 
sults Simon ohen. ae, Ll ay. Rm = 
or Senn expd dre house. mod 
vol Sandra Sage 400 Bway | os) 
asta ping mach te i 
day wk good salary 
ple bd. genl ofe| Burroughs bookhkroping 
AY whee Frank M. Kats, 206 Lexington Ar 
or will teach; urroughs, Moon Hopkins biller, sags, tes- 
ae tile house, 5-day wk. Rutger, 1412 Bwe 

te omy he @ tener. 22908, expd, uaidlewe 

= al+hre, W546 Times 
nights De |e bkpg mach oper +7206, o +1600 

5 dys (summ ae. exp. sa! J Times 
“) pests or Burros Parrott & Bkps, opr, 

St \das. Amperex, 25 Washington s a 
jee siris, will train; ne Sundays or heoti- 
days. President Cafeteria, 130 diet 
‘| Bayer, Mouses, shirts, sportewear; buylax 
Paka! 7 pret. Wiener 5 8 Av 

ayer, dresses, & large sees, Bes 
—- [Levis 20° Went foe hd Pe 
**\Buyer, pop price eotion-raren dtesses. 
Ben F. Levis, 220 W 40th. (bet 1-8 P M) 
| Cailer, NCH 2008, front office, gd sal) 
|perm Hee Paramount, 235 West 46th 
|Cashier-cl@r, know! bhpe, selive Kee el 
A saakal | offic * Write Miss Miller, i4]) W 19 


Tth Ay (Cashier, retief, sales recerd keeper; perm. 
eslary Al. 4-563) 
ry 


a‘. 


Farber, 141 fo! 


ee a Ap- 


rh, know! eno; 
no 65p nee! 


beard: 174 b 


(Rm 214) 


Ediee, 340 


ashier, reiall shop ex preferred; 
jealary, future Tetlored Woman 1 
|\Cashiers of trainees, NCR 7 ites opety 
earn ademt Spears. 722 W pat 
eapericneed. Davy Jones Seafood 
3200 6 Av. Manhattan 

front office, expd NCR tee, 


715 Bway. N Y¥/ 


exece'tent opporte-| 
sor, 992 Bway 

md! 
| Cashier, 
Nous 


hte 


.)" 
| Cashter, 


office, 
Times 
| She ertdan’s 


ge; & de.  Enco 


$1468 Be cee . 


Suivi ar 


Rm 602 Mw 


office pleas envi 
as; a0 


Belyn . 
e; 5-4 week ner Yee 
nao 


Cash er 


tein 


oe peas ledger, trial 


Hotel Lexington, Les Avr at th 
w:|* relief; $30 & meals. Pine 
women 
Childs im 4m 7 AY 
tale exp and) tote! SeTeAeHE, 50 
as Pra 
hes. johnston 
| ashier- bakpr, thoroly =" nan ae 
‘2 St, apply 11-4 P MM: po fee 
ashier. tront office, NOR @ 040 machine 
Loews & Conger, 1154 6 
| Cashiers 
ene-girt office 
eap. 
i Ge. | Store 7? Nassau St files LambDiaee 


for drem shes Apply 
fis WwW Sth 
Cashiter- hostess; 
om, Hotel G Washington, 23 Lexington 
Ae | Cashiers young full-part time 
vrotl, taxes ployment 
eke Cashier, restaarant, C Ly retiel, tree ine 
. ref; a 
atdy; ga sa 
Bx \Cashler, expd, 636-5 PM, aes Tanee 
to Pitas surr, MW Hicks & 
‘, days gc sal Wilma Gowns, 4 W Sith 
Cashiers, theatre, exp; top salary 
Cashiers, same experience geod par 
Mohawk “cady  Aoply Radin Shops. Hh & 14 %F 
rge liotei, 14 z* SS 
exp, %4. @ hr. Aopiy Mr. Kalk 
ere annec: st4 seed opoty 
\Crawford Clothes, 144 8 th 
Cashiers 18-35, no me Gights. Dept 
\Ceramle art — take 
W746 Times 


ras 
office; gd salary [of dept 
Chambermeids, food 
“| ditions, excel oppty 
am x We fi; nme 
luncheon Petal oot ae Kee eon 
reer tunenes; 


aces ata 


keepr, Hotel Wentworth ww “ 
"|\Chambermaid, part time, oor 
> wale’ roundings. Womens Club. 3 KLs-7800 
mes (Chambrmd and attend for erm. The 
A; [Englewood Milk Farm © ‘e 3- S90 
057 | Chambermaids, §: 36-3; 6; ri of ot 
S & conds: oppty. Yale Club. @ 44th 
Chambermaids, residential hetel, rm, 
$22.50 Hekpr. Mi¢«ton PYouse 72 E : 
| Chambermaids, full-pt time; se Sens; of 
ipay, stdy, Pork Royal Motel 45 W T3/nakpr 
Chef] 200-rm Amer plan betel. Mr. Auch- 
ter. Colton Manor Ati Cy, NJ. Tel 41151 


plane Cleaners, 6 nights, ottien Wide ona, § si 


17 23 wk Rm1512 
ro) with, witheat typing, $25- rnd 
Gerendable Agency, 145 W 


dist 
“& typist y. 6 days, 625-086. 
42 St 


werk con- 

= @E “am 
boner. 

WwW eth 
oerm: geod 
40th 


Ties Downin 


=n es * wea 
Cali 
co 


Times 


t tirm; 
an att 


(«6 Sty, 7m} 


office 
al work, knowl tr t 
ag oe >... i Ww ot 


Rox B's — 


way 
al office routine, typ. filins. 
ner. M. Itakowttz, 4 


' 

\Cterteal, 
rae Calambia|ovety, 12s 
Clerical, Mon b4¢. 
| Clerteal, f° 
With dresa howse! Priaht Des 
530 7 AY }Clerteal, some comoptemetry, 

oltee, S dey. Aig-| Paiph ft. Miller. Inc, 565 


Pi. Belyn Clorleal wkrs, good oe figures 
eveeent| pin ‘cor 44th). 10th fleor 
aa, iyplete, b-day oh Emplermest 
ofte lorry e, th 1. James MeCreery 5 Av i 
renl ofce mie. stenege 
ya Imes 


ditions "ho hs 
worker, fy ties rowtine 


Cericals r, plng iy “alles ark: ap 


TT Setaal expd oh Ve wh, advance- 
,- tty Kelly Shoes 200 Madison av. 


‘tinged on Folle wing Vane 


w Dt 
ti\%-hr ok 
ay 


ME Mad 


encelioat\?, leas con 
Jerteal 

simon ce 

Clerical, 





48 THE NEW YORK TIMES, MAY. J — 


Help Wanted—fFemale 


Cae nee sonewel Seite mesh: 605 ctast, 


“me\ Girls Interesting "work. 
7 
advance. P1051 Times — Downtown. 


yA | top tl nnette of Paris cece 
Clerical. ~ bkkps, benr, ag. oun SE EgESS 
salary + comm; Gays-|Giris 


gd hand 
ore ee? Fasteners. 154 ents M4. 4 
7 exp Unnecessary. pass 
Surprise Me, 334 Delancey St wy 


Sitiners Kh ron""ina Eat mz 


168 Chambers St = see: 
oftice, beginners or ex ue +4 » = President Ceiaeris 
wk. Kingsley pun. _D 


Glericals, gen 
Ae >) hve ore arm on. We 
a Baar any mrp Sei 
ac : LJ 
ses [Got oe eka : 
peuen ” r et t mA muir leer rent - 175 : 
i 2 es 
Ng — sa wd cot oe! Sere expt o inexperlaneed, peed Gi 


co 6 ower. secty, expd, typing & care of Se-| Giri 


outstanding opty, 5 & 
MW: : . | Mays, 9 
ture 


a 
nes. $40, 5 day. 
days, $40 


asd. qlet, open [Basagiaehae.. a 
vancement’ E306 Times. fae 5 
work. ae ne 
» = 


126 
. a. 
40 hr of ure. a for « CH  3-2422. 


ericals-Whe-~ mall, ae een ion 


330 


7. 
at eee Madison. 
insurance 
WH 35-9800 


i y Thidaut Wal 


3 oe cor 
eden Hosp, 


0. hy aap dut sie Sik 
socks : 


_ Ent 2-0Fe?- 
site caperviser, 


Sore ne AY. 
+ day- 
aa 


; 
or night. Apply 232 B 12 St 
cndreri Secy-steno, 
_Gr Con. ™ rie peste te 


Clerical -ty 
Call Mr ‘arr, 


week 


mraidered, Ft mi 7 weak. atiract pesiiion tn 
+f - 
oenre Gen 


des: |sential. Dr. M. Bogdonoft, 475 5 Av. 
; Sag ge ee 
Qrerical work te shipping dept: B perm. 

oppty xe 16 St. rs. Fa . 


Clerical, = Barth Fein 


FA a tae ictal 
al may cs i472 Bway, cor” 
ier Agency, 1472 Bwa Dental ass. 
Cet iT: 25, general . oppiy, & = 
week _Halimart_C Cards 417 5 AY GL 3-492, 394° Wilson AY, 


x_ABC?, 1a Bw. — 


euly; gf man 
St.ling conditions. Call CA 5-0700. Mr. Dubow. 
office wk, 

1202, 36 yn. | 

midtown lew office. 
waa HN XC 


lcatel | stties, 


iso" Pei 


: ® Tunes "\anlary. American Sponge, 49 A 
e aast, know! ledger exp; goed| Meer to exec, 5-4, prt office, 
Main t04ih."s a z34n8 Times," _ 
asst some steno; § da; 5 ga ey ene, ae EE EB WE 
oonh. —_ ion Agency, 03 Nassau St a Mr. ‘Mercer, CH 41 
Siene, expd; 35 hrs, 5 
Chemie! Corp, 13-15 Laight St, N Y. 
” aoe, Stene, . busy office; perm: § day. 
ry concern, some kni | 
ear pie, Fiyer, 37 W 47 Bt 
erk. tg zenl office work, 5 days. 
Womraths 16 St 
fH; becnr consid; exe oply; & 
$116 month.y ne Tweet. ‘ 
Cths-typlets, co 
acy 1 Fulton "Boro tai, 
(tks, enlt control, ne ox 
round heipful 1s WwW MM, th 


i‘. begur consid; S-da wk. 
Wi aki ues 
Clerk, order dept, WE grad 


ch, 

ter Machine © 
GE. know! iyp'c 
versity Society, 
Gih-typist, attr & 
start: ga 

Gerks, 5 days, 
ment; insurance 100 


—_, 


ink’ egeri 


perm ;_e write 
i E i6th Povmne 


Softies; 9d Rhopper 


Wau Times 


vance, exp 
~~ mew ot 4n 
; ne Benday. 


‘si games 
Agency it 
junnec, free to were 
\Reda fountain 


Nu-Fil 6 WwW 22 St 
- oe Uday ook) OS Bee 


1474 Bway 
Sienc, insurance broker's office; state age. 
tr Columbus. lexy io P9858 Times Downtown 


times day or night. Whelan Stenographer 
Rm 31 |B a 


ooh ena tenes 
Ta ta wh; elre 


a 


Ay G1 8t) 
Vendy ice méta; $71 


Fie me. young; olvanss- 


t 

anit 
ay es, 360 W Sist. 
is! accurate af figs; good handwril- 
tng; 5 days; edvnemt. Renwal, 902 Bway. 
Qerk, knowledce typing; 5-day week, $28. 

Du-Art, 2465 WS8th 

Gert, billing -inventory ; accurate; 
gd oppty. Salmanson, 1107 "Bway (24 Bt) 


Clerk, payroll dept, ticket, plece-werk 


i Pans EB he exp 


tall exp: high sal. James, | paenaiese Av, miversity, cor 8th. 
7 nec. Name Maker, 19 U ¥. cor 8th. 
5, 666 Sth 

[ets 2068 ‘Ocean AY, Balm 


co garment, titerety pon 5d, mot tt 


sina, 90 ren 
6-4 wh; rn 


* | Girts, no op poet 8 $28; 5-day week; 

-|N ye <— Ot: 

wk. stacy. — Knit, 20 W tcc laren't 
guuies. 


irelioes & card, 
hada eorendi 
¥ . 


OS a 
2 ———— ler. es 
Siene, young, 
for ‘willing to learn. Call Re: 5365. lon eer “Gra, 328. 
ist, typin. , Oe com 


(2); Sise  ) 2 meals. Sydenham «; 
, 565 Manhattan A 630 9 Ay, | personnel, Sth fl 


- x — M ellers, Per: 
teatiles re 2) ‘Reema, Mane Mrs ata 20 bal. 
oppty._ iE te St 


postion; excel Sieno, law 
lin | Doyle Agcy. 215 montages OOS st 

aso ee ish ,| Bene, some know! a aah b-de wh.) sieno, od 
Titan taster werk. (Shou To & Tisch, Brome, faa pret ie 8 ri by a 

Rm 208 Coareters 33.98 tae tlendy; geod par. state exp, sal rieia’ mes Downtown. wer Keeney, 38 We 

; experience. W_38 St. Stene, ; OB bre; 5 days; downtow typing 

perm; start. Mr. Brown, BA 7- fpaetid 
J sip savers before 9 or after 6 8 . perm positions; 


Ma ' 
Sen pale te wae St nth Toot Ras $38, ae seats , extablished exp, 
Lo Steneeran ber GR $1231 


tellers, exnd ~ better | firm one Mr. Padiey, 35-6764. 
: ye Steno, 1-2 yrs =, §% da, 35 brs. A. N.\dienographer, expd, excellent 
floor, 992 Bwa 


aq .2 5 days 
Si pereeaalle Siene to asst security analyst. - 
~ fleatns ability, integrity. P1095 Times Dntn. 


@ of bookkeeping; Steno, dictation Gpae-Eagl. ¢ exp; od opty. 


av IS 1. |C. Lopes, 40 -wn 
surround- 5 
ww erences pe7 1 Times Downtown. 
ase “eupd, small office; S-day|Stene, Cap, unuseal anity, exeelleni| 7, 
a ot re _ CA 6-514 salary, 5-da wk. Knott Hotels. 234 7 Av 
” iend-typlet S-day wh, $35. Sliver Mil Wionsgraphers, expd, rapid 
rood sal. | Products, Bklyn 


Ss York St, jtyping, perm. & Times 
fiene, large Korte hr wh. Meno, ottice; oppiy: & 
experienced on dresses or allied od salary. 10 Sst _St. 1° x 
Shuck Room 4 
sew 


aoe 


jee sredes $90 st; Mite Wa 


operat exp unnec. WE) Times mi 
Cher, “typi perm. Warman V ‘a Ce, 
en 

becnr considered, typlag belpfal. & 


og ene 


oper steno ,, a 
; exc . 
falphes rs ; 
Grand Central. CA 5- ext % 
; at Seas mate ‘lotrts, for _t 
ll | Girls, 


; = 


w 
te 
5 Av, itth fi 
Clerk, steno, typist; +k 
Mr. Mercer, CH 4- isso, 
Clerk for food n= 
Motel. 14 BE 28 St 
Clerks, gd ai figs; ne type; pers, 
5-4: gd sal. 440 4 ar am 2 

nd 
Glerk-cenl office « servicg Mis, 300 8 i 


Pine Amerl- | flenog- 


Gresses; Un shop; _ 
ing. 54. $25 st 


Cats. Tiling, § day © é 
eg YF ee receivable 
tert, Stock records, 5 da wk, cAvecat.|Electric heyosare STilwell 4-6287. 
rankiin Stores, 519 8 Av, Sth fl. _ Eliott Visher, trp, hotel, front oftica. 
Gierk, information, te answer phone; $30| Write stati W285 Times 

wk Rm 330. Hti Lexgintn Av, Lexgtn-46th i- New Ch 
Clerks, beginners, expd; basle 5-4 week.|5-4 week, ge pay ws ; exp, | 
Dun & Bradstreet, 200 Bway Eltiett - Fisher 75 AY 
Clerks. enit control, ne exp nee, , Mehee attractive job; ate. pl. Hemstliche:, oxp oF 
exp heipfi, 5-4, Bs" hrs. 19 Ww ith, 4 1.) Fillett Fisher bittin Fa |Eriedman, 8 

day week; 26. See Mies/Ee le 5 
rbiron, 140 re St. 
$-d0 eet 


Merk trpiet. 5 rie, 18 10 sridee # ite Lt — 23-30 
mise Time = oF pad “htoutter’s. 
, Ine’ 370 W 38th. or oper, “ tamlliar | ¥-aa; 
Glerk- fav churn = tons — ad af figs; joel) after 10 AM. ‘Antoine cite iis rani, 
$25-£30 __ mareuae 71 Clymer St, Bkiyn./Examiner, head, bette soa: meals. Apply 
tert, details, payroll, etc: sal $36; food opty. Breaten Drees. i008 Be Hostess, expd 
40-hr wk ag <— Doll, 200 W Sist, WY Fite Chere pe cop Seong son, Poliacoft’ 
Clerk -nplet, hosplial, ‘WH Wi cal Cosvenll dar wh Cee vpae Ad tng App 
Minas i “besinner; 8118 __hemper Tnsur, “2 Madison. av 
pees: ~cocaslonal errand, some exp er\tions Diamond 2 J 
eat beginner, 


month Reel ai gn E41, 34 " oe 
Gert coe . good - 3965 Hostess, exec 
Mon eee’? Pile chert rm. ablicetion, | i day week, UM-\selary White career, 220 Mad 
Hreatre, ‘Pare Av and | 


salary on 498 Res: — 
Clerk at ures, 
5-4 wk, ~ gh B “wae th _| Pile” “dark: eee ae et 
Gerk, WS grad, youcs; Simon Cohen 111 8 Av, Room floiel information mall clerk. 
File clerks & ¢ is, 17-30 ;jager, Hotel Martha Washington, 
perma. Liberty Mu' utual, 10 ar. he , aonb; 
ay bs ™ 


Revien, 745 Ay, 6th fi 
San typist, advertisin t; 
ts File Clerk, SAPO pberianer, short hears, Housekpr. 
good pay liton Paper Co, 119 W_ 24th 


Gred._perm 5d. Revion, 745 5 Av, 6th fl 
lerk - 
File and mail clerk. Fenl ‘office wh, pleas nice personality; state sal. 72090 gaa. ms 
Juneau ees iS we" st Pe «tame tife ins Con al. 4-120 


typist, handle cash; “expd; excellent. 
salary! 5%-day. Hospital, 400 E 50th 
ils clock coat obice che Gat por oi. SE son Bwolees recerd clerk, typing; 5 da 
ty ime: 5 
ox — sadlcolbge ame jive weslstant. Prinee|$90 nner considered var wa |e 
is, Ye asset tn” vironment 


Gierks, cirls-women, exp ennec; sim 
work, Irg office: 5d ‘y21. th 1, 12 & Mth 
Madison Ave (Rm 310) executive te he 
File cit, musle publishing 66, 60-hr Week) |Geor Hotei, ME registered. 
“ot NYS mh Qeorne Re tel. aie “Pie meals. eo 2pharmacy ao) NTA279, 113 W W 428 |ftene,  conselent rete 
inn 3 he “eh oa wal cotertot, kal dork re; will tall: Ton, swliched, Monitor, 


Ciks, good oppty; 5-40, 38% hres; pleasant 
perm G. Schirmer, 7 &% 43 ‘, 
y, 8-4, gd\ Pettit ~ 10 
Hee aa ter ss samples. — teed Pitain AY, Buiva Benjamin Electrical Eng. 
. John Felix coe ous str, Polyfoto, Bridy Conn 
Bike, erat 


executive office, retail chain. WA 9-1200 
Tlerk for records on long distance calls; 
File clks, no exp, ) 
pa congitione 8, W_ sth. 
he oe one perm, le mar, sal, bonus. Out 
MU 3-371 
; tlso develop-pnt; perm; inp, PELs Ymes, 
rh 
wpoeranmers ree only. 


wll train. Hotel Plaza Empimnt, 22 W 58 

Gerk, know! steno; $30; 5 days, 35 hrs; 

. wlies- -stene, 
ama! cea ethos 
| Piling 
receptionist, 

Phew ele eval ay, Brooklyn cat 
eo: 72 od Wencher. Panate |Btene 
accy emp, 


hotel chain! Oxford, Bway cor 112 St 
~jstart. 
Success Schi. 1 ees Ar ‘Dew. ‘PL 5-6 
[| 7-4889 


Anhalt iad wh 
men’s neckwear, 


5 AY tet ase asin’ ate 


ia Mode, 34 E 31st 


5 Av, éth floor 
cong & cave. Hotel Penn- |, 


according to exp 


——lInation tfice” Wit 
= |ination A sae phon —_ 


Steno, 


Glerk-iypist, beginner ant, deol 


ty, $28 start, no Sat mishers, ox 
then -trelat a < exp; Madle Gily;|\Co, 356 W jewels. Jewel Pig | a8 anes 
a : ., mle Ve. Finishers, 
Chk, yng = know! type, shorthd. Morris|P*Y, D'Andrea Bros, | 


th, 7th fi 


Publish. 


7 





exp necessary, 
| ofc. CU 6-207 
S-day wh; 
hares 


2-6141 


_— | 527-4358. 


Asroctation 42 





beokhee emall 
days; $45. 37 W W de St. Room 1407. 
owite, 330 W 38th. a aye $ Sr tans, Colles |ftene. ettistent, « $37, 5 4, perm. Amer 
co attr salary; yn x ersens ws 
L_peor Tt a “hi week ce 7" \dieno, bant, alert, ambl consclentious,| diene, type Genchecierins records; qeaalts 
= Restrnt. aa & gowns. (17! estate ofc; $30 st 131 Times. __|salary: perm. Louis Silverman, 900 Bway 
same hs aa - ae seit floor diene with 2 yrs’ sepert on p Weense & 
‘ ar 7 per-| ~ 4 Sener ig ni are Se wntown S547 at 
4, 13) W_ = aannene Tall Sieno-ty “Fapld, ace op, adv perm & temp: ex or tnexp: 
<p 5 AY wt jot 5. iy mg . hres: 5-4 ane a fh 353 4 AY intnl firm, Austin Co, 19 Rector, Rm 7 W082 
condl- Le 4 ass | me ; general office work; permea- Signe, rapid. nese oged. , enter board, 
nent 53 r r) 7" 
y reir ed Duken, cs Kings Hey. Baa WA sie A si 18 te oh Wm escallcnt oP) Steno, Spanish-English, 3 da. expert 
& finisher; geod salary. EVer-| *''h ‘arse organization MA 4-5800 Kalfus, 100 Grand rs) 
peceonable, englanive ons Steno, a bak Bae Ay a | Meme. some legal exp, b-day wh; vs 
n ~ resia: pa Admiration 
ee _ for Con . rwhiie Farber, 280 Madison Av Sian, iateal sa0: Gs Grand Ceniral ay Stenographer, light work. cleedy pen, 
5 ——~ |S 4: ‘ 
ee 34 fi, Lia ten a Ha; Balyn. MA) Bienes, ‘on! 
town religious denom- dices. know! bape. pleas curr, om dr 
cosmte ofc, gd oppy, 5-4; $40. MU 3- 
ike figures. U. §.\steno, exp, good typist: S-da wh; $35; 
. congenial atmosphere, W392 Times 
ie By 5 t em-\ diene, one. —_. Breas) 430 & lunches. 
M ichar c 2- 
some exp; § das, Hens. affcg work exp; ig 
ys, $40 Rosenthal 0 & iT 
Bi eee a *, S-day wh, 9-5; small office; 
Bway _jeasy work: $38 wk. Call CA a a. 
Clerk -typist, pe. S” days, good salary pian art, “whi gozhan 
20 W 33 St oor Lae MY Benitt S-de wh, 
fad pee A, 3. wo tines = & mantcer =. Jewted Center, 1- me te 4 baka wena, aw ath,” 
so Ry] y UY} iim eres = wer py ope Br. eae ac st. Velveray & wai a * z lees ry desired. BN os ‘Times 
atl office; "CO 6 ne, lite inser; G4 |Kienographer, excel oppiy; $15; 
es ~" etre as Ts rn we ws i at co et oppty. F | 1107, 11 nad. 424 moudeye._§ ae, Sant Hyman, 103 Prince St 
cumi-pri_ ecth: mee al a = rk Steno, some exp; atir daylight office; stone, , national food corp; 
_ goed, t workroom. rood oppty Madison Av. te 2406.15 days. r Bogart, WA 5- 
Ret nest in Bee SM ak. Sein SOS. [Bey 
; y, Rm reer yn Beauty School, 
3 yt lid he oper, eler Siens, Fer pred, not ‘ccneatial| a; TU at 
» e A 144i Bway, Rm 709 - eler fer agency. ter 1472. Ta bay. _ cor 2 St. | Room ue ‘400 wa ‘ guy | Terni conds; He cap club. “3 
Sachs Buys Agcy bal on hig Sieno-clerieal, 5-day week, . ’ 
Clerks, yng, ambitious; merchdsg office; pres jewelry Siteltack me wy 2 Zz 47th — — BA i oe fon soete. mipuite 408 a meee eons 
7 -hr, 5-d wk  Mangel’s, 1107 Bway. Practical nurse, May thre Aug, newborn |Siene-secy, knowledge Soaseoepins Pre-| Stenographer, 
Clerk. Cnet typist, sort mua; 5 eo; on iS ae; 8 dar. Paciti and 2-yr-old: country. Great Neck S0S8J.|ferred. 1775 Bway, Rm Weise & Biheller. 5A na4 Broadway, 
Mon off; $30. N Y Times, 228 W 43, 12 fl , = 188 (nr John), NY C . expd men's neckwear, gd pay.|Slenogtapher, advertising » eo — — n 
Cth, ‘rd si figures; exe opty; pleas work- nop, 1189, Madison Keypunch operator, "Remington Randi 5 4. Cardinal, 557 5 Av, bet 45 & 46 Sts [state age, salary, exp. W250 Times ore aes Ay iM St) 10 fir 
ing cond, 5 da. F. W. Dodge, 119 W 40th Fitters, thevenghiy eas exp dress shop, 064/40 hrs; sal $35. = Mr, Ross, CH 4-2080 | Brosser, cup, tina Hngerié; sleady; for re-| Ste Bae wt. ae be S._ ad or Bd: hes 8:30-4:36, 
some typ, mag pebl; 35-hr wh; /sal (9-6) nd 27,, LOM glonabetie, ott eom-|tail shop. Leron, Ine. 145 5 A¥ |daylight Btize Boro Hall | Segre: net meee ai ei 4-053) 
$115. Modern Industry, 347 Madison Av |Floor a HS ef pref poll colaey. | Med er nial midtn ‘tee | Printis wetion asst bkpr, $45. Smith's Sieno-t telligent; 68S dices, sencrel offices werk: ao 4 
Cierk, general office work, 4 hours, 54) work. Belle Novelties, dat W_setn SP \Lab tech, “lA 457 Bway start w A St, Lith landur- Realich ‘Corp, 40-17 72 ri f' paz: 
days. perm. Branch, 143 W 18 St Floor girls, seni wh, 2 ne exp. ~ Call Richard ’ - Oe fiens, we : ae 
Clerk ~iypist, experienced, $28. CO 1-4382,|6._ Krueger, "ol W' Soth. cor 11 AY. __| Lab tech, 125 beds, gent i|days: $35; steady. Phone | ga APPT 398 ws” x sth fh pens, th fl 120° 41 St 
aaiedi Food checker, 4 PM-1 AM, $25 wh, 9 mls.|pleas surrdgs: wap recuired. L|Preduction clerk, textile convert, vara ; expd, “interesting pos, midin, 38) Sicns, capable, 
ao “bezinners. 624, 5-day. Asst Mgr. Sth Ave Hotel. 5 Av-9 St technictan. cuntrol:_g¢_pey Trebaiet,_j 387 4 cass hrs, 5% da; #40. LO 35500 _ldays a” 3480 
Telephone & Teleg, 32 6 J au NYC (Cana Neonall, Food checker, day & night shift, = _____- | Pubielty comma | Stans, expert typlat, spd caly, allsaalive, qe Mt ee 
Clerks. give inte over oer coll| NCR. Rm 57, Serv fl, Hotel sewers, "rapear oh tis exp. | Pty m7 6-508. = ty 5 Ay, rm 711/54, ex 1 GR S \Presbyterian Bd . iss b AY. 
helpful, 5 4. Miss Perabo oe én Footehecker, it-9 PM, Senter of. 0 visiting. 3 — E, ereeerveriee Ba, ate 
> Office, 34 fi, | indere & peal eras T+ ganization te details. AP1630 Times, |As#ociat 4 ——— | week. CA 5-5 
da, $8 wt, ee 5 Stow reaka na 0 |r Xt, com pees patie wet xox 7 Stenographer $37 with altern Sieno-iypisi, bkkpe exp; 5-4 5 on eppty. 
Cieck-typist, 18-25; $25 wk ae le Nand oe “2. ey Fog aw tt Bt [gat mre ic" Mabor. 34 120 W_18th.|Avon Products Co, sts 
University isererz, 8 535 W_ 114th, ce a lampan des seace! oppt — 5-4 bce aera = ear i a’ wear, Steno, re y, & day, i0-hr wk | Stone, expd; $38 siart; -— A y AW. 
a te it, sniemmer. 145 & 87th worker, : | exe vs, ‘a 475 5 Av. ‘Rea ad Wl of nsdon'ss NYC. WA 5-25781 3) E 26 St, 7th fi — 
conds; $4; nmr ali) board oat, will teach 
Bkn |General office help, 


seed vay, adivel, aI a $50. Marvel “ase ti 3 3 St, let wr ee ina ae = weghes-teplet, pan 


work, indil 

“ Pete c Ruseower &. 415 tae St(nr 8) 
an his . 30; 54 tn; “tise “Binet nberg, 11 Union que 

ro ‘time, evening 


salary. 
Feinberg. 17 Union 5 quare, NYC 7 
* 13 . os comer / Bethe exp, Sed wh, sal Stene, clerical, | 5 be Far vy business, 
Levy Salon, ran 
wh, B-day wk 


Hosp, 6 St & 7 AY, Bkin |5 day, 37% hr Ask for GK 
World small, » nt office; Steno, ne Sat, convenient, mdin, exp en- 
nf x ‘Sth, ee Adamo. |s4_sal; “siternate Sats. 8034 
) . or besinner, 5 days, Steno, exp le 


9- 4435 |nec, perm: s_oppty WI 7- 
+ mee, Lee on ex 
tlex jon. 148 5 AY Sat. P1055 Times Downtown. conditions 
7 


1, $50 Whiy; excel working 
-y_Re os ‘ h floor, 344 Av 
i expad M board, know! sieno, Steno, “da wh, opp. Nailenal |Stene, berinner conl 
ast ure Sporting, perm Gloeckner, 1 st. NY cf 
: 7 


work, 1. a 
$2 Bleecker St (pe b. sT% 
ry Mlenes, S-da wh, tees than 35 hrej 
125; benrs, $115; age, exp. Z90TL Times 


Gerk- iwelet. works 
subwys. Fr “a "Goat Co, 314 Dean St, 
Gert, miors, «xp wnmerc; 3 
a cea McCall Corp, 230 Park Ay 
Oh, aoe: B dase pid, alert, detall, 
ofc miata $90 start. W370" 
Clerk- typist, mature, interesting 
$135 mo. 428 W 5° (personnel office) 
@lerk, ote wk; 54; advaecement; 
beginner considered. CA 6- 2900 
Clerks, anit centred; Sting hr wk; oppty. 
Derli Shops, v 
Ch- inlet. begnr, —— © small effec; 
Syd $25 wk BO 9-6462 
Cierk-typist, aliernate Saterda 


Ciera we. Telia tase 


; g)Conditions; $28 start 8 
iris, mo exp; S0c br, autmte 
night ait voir Camera 


sey 


an 4 Ht $35, exp. 
s 


real estate organ. & Stenographer 
MW 124 i von T- tr Mack Truck, 
y week, $35, permanent. 41 3) Siers, © rapa sta 


{ Suit ze, Ss ee 

ol 

emia cent exmd, 37% brs 

Wiens, woh. epi Inte, vara 
= ied Persni, 1 Park. 

Gans shee some ce ace 

Bkiyn firm, 23322 Times 

Sienc, real estate, Gr Conil BBE Fas 


sum; alt Sat morn winter 
Siene & ofe girl, Interenti 


” Bacton, 


office, 5 4, perm. Charles Stores, 


seety. Uns 
1] 8 Av, Room 
, enperienced ter CPA 





Gerk 

Publish 

Clerk. general office wk; 
appt Stores. 487 5 AY 


rr ne Tare ae a 


emgenicn § fer aay te baa) reference 
+o 


titan toe “ a. av aioe at Ae 
das, pleasant office. Hall Bros, 417 § Av 


Comptometer opr 


moniter bd 
101 Bwas 


S-day week. Mr. Slew- 
40 Worth St. 


Vouls Weln- 


$25; 0 exp necessary. W57 it Times 
ali operations, ys. | Giclee 
conditions, bth f. 229 4 Av ‘ase » Fivvaay Nanoos, 981 ars . 


ove 
‘omptometer oper, 37) hr wk, nt! Gi i) 
wks conditions, Rm 1300, 128 31_ St. si ris; 083.50 to 7 eT”) oo Varicn brs. 


Compt opers, several evenings each month. \Girl, freight forwarder sffice: § : 
ante sal 
stringers; 


Advt'g Checking Bureau, 79 Medison AY.|american Forwarder, 801 2 Av. 

Tompt opers, “. or busn school +|Girls, expd or inexp bead aesi, iE 
pore. Martin’ ulton 7 St ‘Bxn. ter_wrkrs. Miller, "a John St rm |i rters. HE 
‘omptometer oper; S4, 37 rs; ris, train & ; kheypunch 

office, adv. Darling Shops, 370 7 AV. Isai in (raining. .. ni,_Lermer Shope, Set 284 4 ae nal 

ae 
‘lt in eatin s 5t . 
"“Glean, 


ton. bh h a Jk 6-6088 
salary. Samplehands 
es 7. eg Hrd |Inc, 550 7 Av 


greeting ecards; 
Deutsch, 446 Bway Stene, & 
linen and uphols' 


pr Hote Wentworth, ow [yh 


35-hr. Write, come 
fi, 989 8th ist 
5-day . 9-5. 


rs week: 


worker 
Nassau Med Agcy, 5 Beekman F. ss”: ae 


Compt oper, exp or beenr; § da. Apply 
24th 1. 444 Madison Av. 


cae, & parr = “4 ike bie 


rma 


wrfseis 13 Fw? 


days, G brs, HTM, 


2. 
"y. oy ee 
Wl Times, _ sad 


Ts eet, ba 
"oth fl, "905 4 AY. By 


Gesleesen -eontroiler, 
on fae hoy aoe. |e pV be wa 
Hotel te eds Sl St & 7 Avy — 
ites pinerte, hi-class Reial th fen 
| tad” pte 165 W 58. | diene-t: export documenis. 
Sal ptr alan shor. a wtewear ofc; smart benr 
72 A _ -_ Steno with seme bookkee knowl; state erty * 
‘ a ary Kamleha Lai ase te cut; top sal- oi 5 days veel. Woah Times | Stenographer, exp; 42 week- 
. =p on — Sporteralt, rg By Pio7s a3 Times’ sate eee, oapi We Re eat 
| Stenographer-ty $40 week, business art Room ‘521 
know! | experience - oss ave. Mew 3 at ag Stene-typlat- receiving clerk. 
boy Weimet os 45 St rts 
for CPA. varied wh, excel **ePe-typ, kn bkps, commil exp; 4 wh; 
future; $36-340. 1 Cedar St, 14th’ fi state sal, qual, ete, 221 Times, 217 7 Av 
iSiene, > \Stene, bhprs aest, expd or aright begnr,| Typisis, 
meds haar crea, 6 paternal | gel een reat 
rd, 75 Varick. Canal St musie S ; y adv. frosen 
eat vi ee Ll pore, 'G. Schirmer, 7B 43 St (6th fy nese aSo Routan. 135 ai cea 
; 5d, 40-he wk. BA 7-0852 4 works conde: Bn hoes Sida wh; 
ie 1 edited Goat Co, Sleex: rene, i * Sav 
; abled ase a an diet, fine export, firm 60.|8 4-ds wh; oneal Sony: 
. deorotary, Je ner lavas Trench A + Aener tie Nassau a | (I oes, 
: start. 2 |Stene, detail teeee 
ey-ate oe sition 2 dustrial coneere: pe sal eet, 
1 ame i 4 





midtown. 3 e ; 
consi, sult bl ne begar |fiene, C 
\pay. _De 
oe t inter = 
4 conan he. Sheol e. a advancement me 5.8800 
days; tion; adyg Stenocrapher qeaesel _ ofitice 
dept, Beivn “This Times Bhiyn "* meginner considered. 
p, 4 hrs. Bronx Window Stenographer office work, 0 day, 
0, 372 B 162 St. Bronx (permanent. sat wise Times ns 
. b-day con Men- 


$35. Joseph Steno, ex urrew 
7 William at eal J (gee Sate 003 12 Sh. 
TU days; cmall of- Stoneerapher-sonl alten work, 
wntown Ten wk 6- 
sea offe, ow TS TS 


with manufactering 
fer 13, 1 1 We Lith fi, | Been). 


al exp, 5-day, |Steno-t 


| pital 
113 5 FPS steno-see 


\dept, 
Stene, bak 


nent. Simon Cohen, 111 8 Ay ah = sieey, rest ‘period. Spiral, 406°W sist. | Weiner Sos w W mn. ea OT _ eae. air Sra 
“eave 
warts & ak, a Tth. fe va hee, 440 start i 


Com ; &-da w 7; sal-|Giris, Mode 1 
Irn a rand lege fresel at 
Hes baba be 


plometers. 
ary open. Franklin Stores, 519 6 Av, 5 fl.jane Lexington ay, Rm 643 PM. fine furs 
i as nasi to advig exec; 
re, miei. ee 


Comptemeter oper, add & ml “pab-/ Girls, plastic ab, =) inelined, edels, comole, bust nist 
Hsner._$¢a,_rm_ 406, 208 8 006 Call Rm 1305, 516 5 Av = %: a a netcn aia 7 kK phe. 
Sotd, 9 ie VA 6-4340, Mrs. Lansing. 
: Kecty to edlior of ; ale 


Compiometer opers, expd; pores siock » besin a= - Ta n 
temp & period _ P1013 Times fore 1 Ww _Ihh, a4 fi sis aed: - pee WwW “publicailon; 

| pack ground, Kg W1i4 Times. 
Per office midin. fa. sal. 


genl effe wh; 5-4, 37%4-hr; 
5-1408 


ne Saturdays 
$277, adv. WAS 
Mr. Ollander, 


Lares wh; perm; wslery: 


Comptmtr p., ai $-4; — waite Girls, tight assembly, 
a 


oprins: wh, t! 
ofce;, $32; advet. CH a4. steady, Art Radio, 115 Liberty 
Sekt 
, ad at- 


pa 54 Ap ha org Rev! 745 3 
™, pply on, 
lompiometer oper, exp, knwi tp, oF 
day. Revion, 74 5 Av, 6th fl. App i ’ 
Comptometor oper, kawt foldbroa yp 
1 Charies_5 ent. turner Ha: 
3 Pica ee ata 
viv sal ith fn. u 2. 
open, . 
,_ 5 day. Sears 
7 _Gimbas Tis W 324, | 


i ’ 
a od Pe a, perm 2 cons; good 
Gaytime, 370 7 A¥ 


Co Bh 
wk. wrk Paar, Jatt Be 
» Mitre’ |Tv 


Dunhill, 620 5 Av, Rose, ie 
warvieer, a fit ele 
‘ones Mae Winter, i i S. Life ins Co, "AL 4-1210 ts. 
rete morns, Supervisors for Jewish religious orphanage: 

state details, APIG28 Times 
1 i x. expa |Saper. phone-iiles, > poe religious ell- 
ef but not essen. CO 7-528" le; state sal ils, BK632 Times, 
. know! typing, 


pe, Raoul Higuresi F< 5-da 1 Switehbd, recept . 
Kaplan Textile x_n é oily. FSar_wt. Boom 1361, pal Bed ae 


‘ 'w paginas. Ba Switehbrd “anh ‘etties| Tri 
lez a ga sal “ew ut ww iene “at 


Soe on adie ‘ Best. 
‘lt 


Ses ee i me- 
\40 hrs dae Ster 


nited A 
aan ah 


micanaly” appeentmnan “1 Sar, 
eeet. oxpd, by CPR Wrest BGinet Sh aecaelt cee Th tet" taiblaw’ wtb] laamsed.| Sanpete 
$40 st. Miss Mies Semiarel, a Holteworth x hens T2008 Bway (Bist) (idtown om 
perienced, OPA 14, ager | tee, 


Girt tor stock odels, velines. size 15-17, 
3 days, W408 Times. iday | Streamline Button, new 7 on wc i “Carmel Bros, §90°7 Av. 
machs, alse | Model, 


sient. 13 sine 14; expé ye. coats and 
ent. Greene + St. jsuits 


Linkers Herbert, 205 W 39 St. 
—T rater, expd, by CPA|Giris, sreet ¢ cords $76 am 48 hrs big eoats- 
ewes Times bonus. Wil Leebare Pubi, 153 E 


Models, size ii, air, xpd 6 is-sulis. 
Wolf W 37 St. 
., biadery, 5-da, sa eat. ee ee coe 


1024 


ee Robinson tae Wea cy. A ic te 10: 
Si Phe” eae we ee ee 


94, or wrt Three Oats. Npstd. K k. Promto 
‘ook (assistant) for hospital. Apply Dieti-' Giris, assembling 
tian, N Y¥ Polyclinic Hosp, 45 W 50 St. $33.25 start. Sth fi, 


‘ 


salary agey. a 
Comptometer 
Gays. 3 hrs; 
Com ptometer 
office, good sal _ 
Compiometer oprs, segnrs cons, 5 days,\Giris te learn on 
adv. ige tex firm Mr _Cooper, WA 5-1200 jlight factory work 


othe ah 1} 


soe kt? aed 


teens, 
secretary slenographer, 
nier, 545 5 Av 0596 


Rosrstary, Tooal, experience; S45-58. VA 
Secretary, Hadle Gliy, 36-35, eK oat 
Agency, 2 


sent Ae Cet anee 


Ties — 
Fo 


ssyate 


rager, 303 5 Ay 
Stene, exp pref, will consid Seger 
40 hrs. Mojod Moolery, 36-20 33 t Ly 


ape Poe aes oe 108 


oy a » —* (cor oa 


clerical dutles,-reliel work; 


floor, 2729 4 Av 


urse, charge operating . ry ra 
ity, 6 hrs; salary open. Z3374 Times. c 


“st det; FQ 


da; $35. Dohe T 


experienced. Room 518, 365) 
i Says, U0 week, pleasant 
Ne 

possess 


a Galt aoe 


. hour week 


tsi woaki : rel- Fp 


» - seedy 
wns teat Stites. EAR 3 


Sieno-clerk, perm, S5-hr wh, snl $30-533, 


Lancor ae Cece _185 Sr nal rw ees 
——; 


hours, 5 Typlet-stene, 


mah a te 


closed “all ‘po 


 futére, 
tit Ee 


exe/Typist, te de billing; 
58th. |hours overtime ~My ow 6-7461 


1-8 yrs” exp, yng girl 
at least 2 pre’ exp; 5) 


S-day | Tre 


Steno, beqnr cons, interesting pos, ane ‘sity 
eet ioe me. es pe | t 


eup 7 
ee Window Dispia 


TraltsToe 
tists, 728 ay. 
fra Pare Gaeta 


— 


instruction—Female 
Business Schools 


~~" PFENOGRAPHESR-TYPEWRITING — 
COMPTOMETER OPERATOR 


WLEMANTY INSTITUTE 


Near Bway. ST 9-@000 
JA +e 


i; perm; peb- 


French, 25 W 45th 


stene desi 
: NX Feraitere Exchange. 206 Lex Av.| 


7 emp.) 59 waa st 


14 Sutphin Blvd, Jamaica. 

ser wien Aa | MLR, 
newt | monitor bd, 38 hrs wily, 1450 Bway at dist. PE 68606 

nt euros. Bkiyn, TR 5-4576) shorthand and yyeertune in 30 ftuil 

+, 2° Apply empimnt days by Professor jer (former Columdts 

7m Kiyo. _| University Instructor). Days, evenings _ 

|, 38 hes 20° | 


si Co Dancing, Music, Dramatic 
week, Interesting position talented amateurs. Littl Thestre 
riund Mfg Co, 460 W Sth 


_Provincetown. GR 7-894 
Jat aie 


| 
| 90. 


orrTy 
| Group N. ¥. i 
handwriting | can Generali 


LO_5-5635, "WOMEN FAST & AND YOUNGER 





Pleasant! 


iiton Radio, “ae ¢ Av,| 0nd _comm. 
recent 


reeptnst, ex: 
mae offi,” 8 ce 3-4 wk PLS 8 Feed. | Demonstrator, 
wheb jotta tries <a of cool |t vi Rotheetd, 340 8 es dist time, salary. 


Pari ' 
5 days, WA on hes zee te am ‘ |store; sglary 2 nessa WA eal on 


(feet : 
Cent > exo. 
x! ae 


. oxpd 
vaste pe. "\Phone Mr. De Cresy, LO 5-3811, for 
ah bass fae ek  eeraney, broker's office; stale age 


4a | Girls, women 
Fecha ts. @ Po6o Times Downtown. 
r= 
wk: 
per ving Meh 2 fie 


a 


; 


Real estate, midin. long 
siswomn, peli-ise apts, com TT Times 


|\Sales executive, young, ecupertenced, by 
corset manufacturer ewer? 23501 Times 
Sisgiris, for sift aoe ore oppty. pleas 
x. |Sel cond, Giauber, 1373 St Nicholas ay NY 
irl, exp annec, 5-6, Sendaye cleeed. 
a Types ti, , 28; engi 1. oe" Trt Sales Bucnier Cake Shop, $12 Lexington av 


irte, . spertewear, wk. 
Trpte os be, g =e, ON da; summer. 6-433 Dorothy Zucker. Inc = 
5 aa . m \Salesgiris, expd ladies’ tes, eneet 
we sail oo — wi 


+ Ede wh: yy. Dore, 146 W CO S500 
7 San @-hr week; 
ay i huis ‘Gree 


demonstraters was, 
com, hours 9-3. Call 9-12, 3-6 IN 32-6454. 
Let 55, tafreduce Wee Tervise te 
Rews- | mothers: :* sales, od sal 
sort mall; § da. off 
71-1473 t-Mon fie. WY Times 279 W_ 99, 120. ee 8 
opera 
sary. Apply at 50 
‘Troll datistical, 8 4 wh; $35 Har-| 
Frees A 80 a st. is, Kerr, Forster abo, wi 2-787 
Telephone Rr ay? on 
brary, 424 we 


Sea. Girl- woman eall om beauty ; wal, ot 
zone win Pat wo = o "|paz._sar =e Pine Co, 45 Astor Pi (8th) 
ad-tkr; 5-4; abt ie Se xsiet Times. | others: vie wees 

|gd sal, comm. Gimbels, 116 W 334, 34 1 
tors, no experience meces- Trott. , & 
3088 AY, reg bd ch Tinde, ti W cath St 
anh Vr 
i camer E days: Ww 
IN _Y¥ Publi 
Tt ‘operator, 


—ey so. . . 

pints reaper Fl. Sun” = 7 areal 
3 ely “sal, O 

co cht Op Hot Bi i Be a liam St, ve aT ad $55 onask <a 

Tel opers; must ve preenpotnt P M. Goldberg, 1s Quentin’) R4, xiyo 

Hotel Pennayive Sr aibies “drestes. ‘al. 

Cy Eifeesn'} ands, binifiim, {1906 Av 


Fashions, 88 Nassau rn BE }-9635. 
pd; 2d pay. Modell's Fordham 
Fordh, 


aa Re 0-300 foie a7 S Steak ave 


5. Salesgirl, candy shop, ex a wae Bay 
writing, cxpd motion | Pe b Sa: 
wa ikiyo. FO 1h 


‘ it 1501 Bway, Suite 3800 
: . salary, 
Cooly Trvlst, export, unesval LT. wree- iat berty Av, Bkiyn. 
| bri; consid — fi hosiery & ) shepe: 
ee days, 40 hours; advemat; pore excel sal Apoly. Gene Shops, 161 fn 


eer gaat a Peceaty AY fink ot at ee ot 
In ernational Dial Sette, "y Phin ti | Ben Bakery. 1805 _ Avy U, Bein DE 6-94627 
: Bion ° Babein, 7 | 5-day week; good Salessi . 
ar 17? Union Square 
at Fri 7, ga at figures; 630 
Fes “da,"33 sor br 76 3 
ra considered, 


cool ote fi iF AY, ne} 1101 
ae ys 360 
$28 “weekly. 


nia, 394 


steno: salary $40, Greenpoint 


salary; ‘position. 
eseeces! 1692 "Pitkin Ay, Bxlyn 
expd children's wear, 


até. 
br da ‘Silver, 522 Grand aan nN = <_ 
opety. | Selesledy, 
sist lexcel sal. Ca 


2 le a cam 


jy AUs, dresses; sal-com. Mer's, 
02 Queens Bivd. Sunnyside, cor th 
“nace wporiswear & secom, 5 da, eal- 

PI th Shops, 352 4 Av (25 St 
. excell sal, comm. Bert & 
Madison Av 


Serrane Sw 


rao es a 


calito Sy rw rat: 4 ay. ‘te ~ 


Ie ypist, e_Fotts, 314 5 Av (32d). 
| clerical, steno 
desirable. ee 2-3149. —— 


a Se 

_ Berens, 7? Madison Av 
to a, §35; perm. ee. 
92 cu . Neila 


3s ul. “tt i HK. | 7. of 
itr Te N — Mr Ronald. 34 fl. |opmen, 2st 


8. eupd ladies 
y learn comptometry: § iius com. Sachs, 35th- 


ete cat 
25 eae ine ext 200 eae rae 
ole exp ennec. Apply Et. mr savor a 


tae ~ ath. 
Records, 619 W 54th, 8th oa rat ghte Asie 
won very igh 


Frplst. permanent oD » lemnporar pales? On . 00 Pas tw ame 
"| rate 
ea _ seme ndings (faite 


~ securate 
_= joom det. pets spee 7 y spiawear, ete, 
Tyree. certeat X= meen Ty surres -pt_time, g@ sal. Van-tex, JE 17-9713 
_Remieteter Plaza. See Miss Jackson. | arrosy mr book Beare _ store, ‘ut en vy. expd ind v.spestacty gnee. & & 
$30 start. Fer 
a essential 
roy O tharine fine, ‘Main 4-4 a ea 


alesiad 
jort Capt, Se Span prefd, not) wk: sal & com (cite st ete 
Salesiady. ay there eppd salary: 
4 ne advemt 
| dees an. wt. Wonlecs Brown, Inc, "tis fas (be ‘Bt ae aren references ‘Mo 
beard, 7 Kany tebe cashier, $28, S-da oh: rm. dey \alesiad 


dxp better —- & salts, se 
| rR TT 
aere exp. Aberer: ante & Fitch, 19 & eves. _Rose Mae. 217 
oe oe. aben sir iat 





vi 


Jay | 


ch. know! 
|wh, im 7 Beer 


ty 


nwea at 77 St 
1 we Salesiady, expd women 
oe pork; Oa 
~OT90. 


=F? geod at figures, expd; perm; 89%.) Kosition | Waildo's, 110 “w so St . 
5 days ma goed Rm 803 Salesiadies, exp, retail stores; sal & comm, 
Topiat-alor. sod of ue egevens pleas; opPtyi Anpiy before noon. Kayser. 487 5 Av 
ey Sisiadles, 4i-hr wh, 4 
as. medical ck; ox 
bog know! fu ST : Oa why 80 tj ta oe tPereenaal ‘Ortiee) eRe iggy eccee oom stds 
ox ae ST clerk, front office, aliermating\olus com’ Messingers 410 W as 
ne * aphy: * saa “olfe re RY, pun W H'tl Paramount, 235 W 44th 1a, dean, an 
ver Raa ues sienelis, 5 a. og =. Assoct-|sai pius com. Wintred Froc 
ad. Hi Program Service 4Sth Salesiedle cole t “ -. 
vertuing seer. —_134 8 tsa Ral, 1006 Frolats odaronsing, futing mi ood Fp! accord to exo a a alle 
Union Library Asan, 121 E 24th Tralet-clerteal, y day, 35 bra; 835 Solectety, Sveseee, ™ R40 
Typist, know! steno; 25 hrs; perm. mye: Ton Aart w 90 BWC Yc - 
toners a = _Boere. of Trade 200 5 Ay $35, 6-16, 6 days. Cardinal, 
Ty, exp: ar he wk. Miss E. gre Ay bet 45th-46th 
Se! iano, mate r 424, oe Unli contrel clk, excel sal+oppty adv. 
-Wisas-\nrs. Emily, 402 § Av 
Usherettes, 


a begre-oz 
tines. ith wis B Av sr pie full time only, yor, exclusive. com pW a: Piaza Hote! 
~ ploasant susveundlinos, 5 days. Apex Nermendy_ Theater, Park Av ang | saleslady, aa geal 
tall a coon Dias 
Sot Soentlal Tal 


nding t 
| Typist clerk, accurate, age 14-84, take Fe- — ae re alace Theatre eer iT | a.) sol, _full, part 
71-0457 Waliresses, full time, ° 


sal bones 
“R, we be “ 





oe 
. Toh Bee, 


sell aecessories. _ 
‘sth Av shop. PL "5 itte 


Salestady, 
587 position, 


andy, 
Sad interview 


W ‘334 


at an 

er wal piealip 
bonus “Chern “Coe 233 Bway 
i; & eonsid 

Fyn “Marin & Clas, ‘i w 


Typ, expd forma, Ba A, 
drafts, a4 sel Rm noe 745 th wal 


Invoices, 
ser 3 eC “Soo Bark av Wahieeso 


and Lo 3 
te t omit 
| work 5 da wk: 


Be E 45 St, ee 
da. salary 


7 
Tie w Wah | 


sists fr elat-elert ordeg 


hry ing con 


erate, oeex week. BA 7 Sun off Seeaeinet 
wehes. Typlet hrs. Columbia Pletures, is, Hotel Herald Square, 116 W 94th ~ |gaeh tome Watt 29 RAS &. 
Corp, altresses, exp unnec, exe fut, anif, meals, comm Pack Lane soon, 2 Fal a ms 
jpeg Bovtter § a, 598.5 AY, Ab A —" Salesiady, ex) sal. Belle Ber 
vi expd. Rest tos amps, 408 W istnh | neraeay, eet Some av, ™ > ie) 
We a is ory works | 3) S. @ taming, minerals, exc fut. MA 
ire. 8 é Pat oar “a “pad ene sale apeliy op exp; better 
ite hurtes 720 Madison Av \g2 ——a gerie 
gets Bigot‘ iin Facey. B® Sosten e Sa 
‘ ite 
ae hin Taner — are lery ns Birnatt ihe Ls - 
e's enry Siswmn, sccesers, wit 
—— m, Bete op. le tine, Motel |Personnel of¢, Oppenheim Collins, | 
insytv' : Saleswomen = * »& “Gerta Dest 
Te. Wollsenses, coon, Doster 5 on Room. Apply Store, 142-10 Jamaica Av. Jamaica . 
x omen reeses, coats, 
,*¥ 12th S [yrentopeoes, exo. —. pay : ie oat, Bear — Tr. hy] § AY, 
week, ountain inn ean 0 
Waitress, eves & weekends, uptown; res- pany. Sartin’s, Pulton brs ~-— §7- 
‘Typist, Eleciromatic, or willing to learm taurant; g@ pay. WA 3-9850 lGaleew i. ont — 
same; 5 days: opportunity BA 7-830 Waitresses, ¢@ whg cond. Apply Pine Bm, °*e** omen. “Stern ares, $ sts : 
Kivoly| Typist “5-day week; 35 hours; me exp; Hotel Geo Washington, 23 Lexington Av Mors — 
vancement; $28. AS 4-6470 Waliresses, part-full time, week-ends. ey ; |] ae, 8 wh; perm. 
| Frodet- Ediphone oper. Mr. Creamer, Lad-| Rosenhains Rstnt, 121 E Fordham Rd, Bx. Pa at 
Bowmena, © A Av _& 3 St Waliresses, part-full tise. Good earnings! |,5cry betore =] Mary trate re 
ee tuniiy tor sdvet; 5 piue Kitchen, 79 Chambers St, nr City Hall. | lélew rs 
‘| aa week. 120 Wall St. 2 floor Waliress, 11:38 Ax-2.30 PM, no tipping: spec. Apply ofe. ote 303 | Rm r 
| Typlst-elerk, ane considered; gd sai, meals, waite. Tine ft, 229 W 43) gases ready- to- wear. 
=e oppty; _midt a $326 Times.\Wasmchers, ex wh: cond, wiay_|| lerks. 
pist, a ny = 7 wh, pleas enviren- Kelman Bros, i Ne theses “sn ba 71-6053. | 
ment oat [Woman, gen'l cleaning; 5-day wk; 1:30- shop: perm. § E SS St 


w fae days. 2:30; $25 wk gohaoee-<7¢ PQugese i E 624.|Setielioe, heme home portraits, $2 
<< udio. 1995 -— t 
comin Wad Time 


79 Times ‘oman linen + semmer Findla 
bebe wt, 54; EK ea ns ne rm & board “Bie Times | Pema lehe Cs 
Yarn Essex er, sal =a ‘comm 
siatstienl mice 


eardin h; 
= CP hlei eas Women-giris, light . © 
know! steno LO" sree als “ap 14 Pat hate 


exp4,\surr; 5-4 week. 33 W 22d (Store). 
worker Exeal comity. off i shor 


Women, light, pleasant work, wrapping > 
eg a 1 eens Tei indies’ peckwear; "gd pay, 15 W371 ebrds 
gett E xx comm, e1p Gnace 


<< factory. 
Krone, st Siw 18 St tlhe = mo 
: — pald while learning os -| age _Te 
Type, exp; bh work vale; pleasanl resses, ‘Tosca, 118 Fulton St, city | t ~ 
haters hae 23 St, we n \¥ne tsay in dental oft, 12-5: 30, 5-da wh; /ginner-expd. TR 5-6TT T tor 


knowl siend pref; righi ex Farber g)45 W 55 St |Full-part time, =F 1 
i140, 5-da Turnclitt CH Mos -,|fowng Tod en oh foolne & sieno, gen'l Jamaica, Flatbush, Flushing Z3 
joffice work 


2 s. J See eoe Bway im | w M 
M Youn lady, personality ; Ps; perm Help anted 
10, ae 141 st, NY —— AGENCY, ms | Xe 


. -\¥ dental, exp unnée; Sy -da; 
wok nh, ,, = Dentist Inc, 135 St & 7 av Execs ph a A US (1), om Af to re 198.000 
“2 poet. ars, cosmtc, org chem 1 to $10. 006 


Vested fast typ, cert seals eff Sun-|Prodn 
aT ee eae 229 W 43, 12 fi |Sales Mars, l, NYC 1. West 1. Opes 
if f a | ng Indien sinnes, rol clk, ewhd, | S2lee-Drug (6) Cosmetic (4) 
a ree te — type, Cpe [purer. piece goods 1, totletries 
op ‘urchasing, metal & mechi trades 
Ry sar 3 B- fr nits, or kines | Air-Conditioning Sngr, design 
position, rrr da ae wa Eon 
ew? Chem, phctis (1), cosmetics (2) 
Foremen, cosmetic 1. ayrup 1 
Packing Engr, Gesign simple 
Pharmacists 





order | 
eS ba we —_ Presi se 


Ty 
work 


Trolet. for office 

jjew ers Board of Trade 20 Ww 
Typineleas orm 

$25 start “pegin’s. Si ent Parent, 


Novelty Letter, “ime Bray: 


190 
ime 
Open 
was 


Ls & , & Beer jSales Detail, phetl, pre med or « 
*. ‘Pare. = Park Ay, a nt “|Ph D, direct rearch, chem 1, food 1 
Investigating wh 


Ch 


= oh oy | CHURCH 5ST. 
° c ClA charge shop. exoeii 
. emt age eur; pt fires. 40 hrs $3.000-§3 «00 
|foung ‘lady a Getnente tell| CABLE Clerk or teletype opr $1.980-§2 200 
tle trashing Suite 1465 Bway BKKPR. 25-40. foreign dept, bank 12.100 
|intelligend girt foe genl ofce work, $25-30 Airline Reserv «© Pees agency cerks, 22- 
istart. AT 99-7478 28 yrs, single ~~ college s 


mere Per-| Airline suppiy Clerks. ys. single $i 
Regine ~ gt Draftsman, 1 ; yre, Cap S day 300 
*harmaciat (rerister hospital 
instructlon—female | TYPISTS, learn banking. ‘unch 
Beauty Culture [SECTY-Steno, Radio City “3 
BRANFORD BEACTY ACADEMY 


|STENO, A-1 export firm; @wntn. 54 6 
A BEAUTY SCHOOL OF PRESTICE 


| Massoenere NJ res, 30-50. NW Y bank 5). 74 
INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNIZED | .p.gg, “HLSBURY, 14 B® ST 
PRIZE- WINNERS 


| edvtg & retail, RTW. to 613.000 
Thousands of Banford graduates are = [Cie Engr .sipr&pree auto mechy.$8/ 11.000 
yed at leading salons or have 


/SLS DIRstatry bkgrd.org.sis terr $10 008 
ing business of their own. 
FOREMOST INSTRUCTION 


|ACCT Exec, pubcty idea man so 
[PROD Mer.sipr ind tool rm bked 7 oe 
BY EXPERT BEAUTICIANS ’ 
ween Eve, low tuition Rasy terme 


WwW 4a 
ae = 


ear: pet, od wk: $30 st. 220 

|Typist-file clerk, monitor board Sar 

\week. Room 1210, 129 Pearl St. N ¥ 

Typist, Fanfold experience; 5 day, 35- hour sonnel 

week $150 month W241 Times 

iy expd typing ma/ling lists on aris 
Paris, 153 EB 24th 

tye-ei knowl sieno; Baklyn ofee; 2) 

rey en Mr isaveme. nae xe bees 


™ 
428 
se 
43 
iw 


rs; opply, advemi 
70 Pine St. N ¥ C 


fe Cee ii? a on _— 
Flower Frat exp <9 as yf 

v7, bond or wp. oe 
ee 


STORE Mgrs, retail RTW to $6. 59+ 
DESIGNERS, struct! steel » MG 
DESIGNER. modern _—at— 00g 
Accountant, ¥-- adm.trvi & cud 

Interviews 8 30- “we 


— 

a eH, fe — 
uEeE« 
Interview 10- i. 
INTL Aud, 32-34, coll grad, ~~ e- Wy ” faa! of 
audit exp 

TRAFFIC "» Export Assts, exp. yng $3-3400 
|AUTO Insur Underwtr, yng. adm. $3-<000 
SALES Prom. yng. top persity to tue 
TRANSF. Des coila complex High 
COIL Des, R F & I F circuit High 

LUCAS PERSONNEL 


IF 
va” Training A Habl "Vinder Gi 
‘et. Training Available 
HIGH PAY 
EXCELLENT FUTURE 
For WILFRED Trained BEAUTICIANS 
HUNDREDS OF GOOD JOBS 
Learn under world famous suthorities. 


stay entail 4th fh . 
7, Day-EBve. Part time Low tuition 


Mad BUDGET PLAN 
Soong | we pe ite Sa /Visit, phone or write for {ree booklet “RE” 


WILFRED 
*/roughs _Machine, 5 days, $35. CH 23-2422 
Typist. si i i -| Academy of Hair and Beauty Culture 82 Beaver St Opposite 63 Wall st 


general 1657 Bway (5Sist) co 6-112 
surr oundin: _ 5 days. GR 5-0500. si the State of N York \Elliott-Fisher Bk wt pene, to @ yrs 
Typist: slight Know! viene) 48 hei a) — Ld of New York (CLERKS. age 21-27, a —F- 


72 eon itn Ay mee 


PREPARE NOW Export Clerks, inveng YT steno 
VOR BEAUTY CAREER AT GROUP INSUR Clerk. yng, typing 
HOLLYWOOD ACADEMY SECYS-STENOS, proméal, “ 
OF HAIR & BEAUTY CULTURE irypist-cLERKS. ‘edge ty 
Under the supervision of 8. A. BANDER. wary sr. > 
World van Authority for over 2% yrs OFFICE 
CEMENT SERVICE 


BwaY (co 434) wi 7-2a00 EDWARDS 
“Lienert. ye State of Hew York goer obec oan man 


L eand veachir feviune i yu culture. [BINDER (EB) 


ile <0, 9838 Hodson’ Bivd' on journal Square biti a See 
saa: Sef 


flee; 
WwW 4 | 
|CASHIER, acets recetv w te by ‘arm y= 
.._. EXPORT document cik-typ, exp 
BL clk, freight. forwdg; future 
|SPANISH Eng corresp-steno  $55-$50-445 
MESSENGE are in rae future Se 


MOLER School; benely outs to 
Vets opp. Est 1903. 154 raerie » on 5-2310. BKKPR-STENO, Bkiyn. ve — 
Business Schools RESERVATION CLERK. Alritne 
. ot BUSINESS (BOY, after school, in summer 
: a\*S VET APPRENTICE 


FAine PERSO 


son 
ort Mer Span Corresp. 


Physicist stress analyst exp 


tional Records, 437 W 59th 


a 
WH 3-7686. 
routine, Boek, Exe fee: 


13 W 42 ST 
MARI 
The International! 
BEAUTY CULTUR 
| 130 ya Av (Sith), nse coor. 


oppty: ‘give. Sep. 


ty -steno, naperving deme: 5 Fit 
Goldfarb, 33 E 17t | 
leepats clerical worker; 5-4, Bai; | 


pet __Metropolitan, 41 E 28th 


aotene, on office wk; @ bess ose good 
‘onverters, 9 = 


, 351 . "ay ye 


oll <, s Se | 
Sieee day- nahh 


py aie eo 


Fotoshop, 18 BE 42 & 


Typist-Stenerrapher 
Peart St, (Bayo Hall), 


Estabiisnhed 
TRALNING 
te aa 


-¢ 


’ 5 y . — ‘an + 
AA SAIL — Rosia any Monday. 
courses. Placement service 
‘Bey. eve. 45th year. 52715 Av. MU 38-1890 SECRETARY. to rapid accurate 
course, basle typing; | month | POSITION SECT ING BUREAT. 
& John St 31 Madison ar 
120 E 86th otinved on Following Page 


area. zm. Gread 
-— ie 
~ Wide, is 


} —- ‘ 


Grace Callshan 





Wanted Maie—Agencies 
ae ——§ Tinned Wren Voecaliog Pa 


=A PERIONNEL. SERVIC Wiliam & HA 
Lex or to Weil Bt St gtation” 
SPECIAL OPEN 8 AMG] YM WEDNESDAY SALES | ts Dera fa 
wogt, May instrament : = ge, ae cen 
Bes fy = 30. LES: Canned meat ' 


lait Fa "Briere Ps 
api a 5 


pel fn By Sy 


Tui 7 r sf 
(Open Tronight 8 ay} 


Liaison Engrs, bet ra~ 
dios, tubes or tele exp esent) 2 Ee 


§6000- i 
prod & mfg fidg crtns $7-10.000 
RAT & VENT ae grad young 
be exprnced mic» 
MECH ENGR exp y mixed feed mf Kitchen 
ane sy mdwet HIGH SALAR | Florida, 
=— NR RAFPTSMN mech! struct ISpecification Writes, archt! 
arch! (various lines) to $6000 |Constn Estmtrs, quantity take-off 
chEML ENGRS & CHEMISTS special~ | Process Engineers 
joes on | dl. ) Orng rem.to $5000 rerch, MS or 
hse proj to $5200 
TILE ENGR. , resrch to $4800 cp 
orn TECEMICAL OPPS — VERS L TECHNICAL AGOT 
~~ KUL-AMERIC vr “UNIVE on par NYC 
OOM $1 congTR. Supt-steam -pOwr pe 





arte uw ef esti & Ses 
saree pap ian 


. intal 
co’ MERCIAL LISTINGS |INDUSTRIAL Engr, 30-35, 


EET: Sota in tp Bs DESIG 

D CLES, ind 38 Jackson Hts to 250) OF FICE i SUPV-familiar petrol 
shipmen: 

Le TERvIERR, | F yo ne = ‘0 fise FOREIGN ‘ POSITIONS 

“7 maint & oper..Open|trade 


; 2 ne 7 .. ” =. an. . at at, Ss . : - —— a . } ; ck ‘ - . . or. , ° 
=. SLs’ A, 4 —— ¥ wits - — Slereps, « tc , well dolts ‘ : , 1 i 
. yo -4 ; ‘ " , ; = - es com. 1398 tines distri : 7 
2- ; ‘ | oa : . “ol pas sory 5 sonst, >. Ol 
; TELEPH Engr, install op auto pl...Open rch room » . ' Specially mloomen. od a. 2 
; ; Site cocape [tgiz—,aluanee. 2 ; ; ! 1a |pSS ene ceed eh i iy — 
INVESTIG Tra 22 m, [PERSONNEL ‘ Seo. loaivenss } . : — | pay. Oe ! oni a exper, ton. 
Sm PS me Le AMS A fy « 2 - s, expd, credli beth f ows: _ ; 2 rp_9- $4 Sis ints Wha Tew 
ME An EW A shift hrs || $150/DIESEL Mech. constr equipment... .§5. ’ : 00. ‘ *| chat 1 it) rf W 18th. by, ing . EMg 3-5 ; . , u i yrs (3 Navy). destgn 
LINE OFVICE CLKS. Gosene ie PHYSICS or &. KE. res atmospheric rice aS vor . . oy r- : Ls aaniversary issue; whee "TERROCTIVE sot 

- ._ : Veeee - i : :'. Times, Wee an tat te-ritery Columbia yrs’ 


bee ota SMITH-construction | RR Sha Bin t. la. Tuck, & Ro . BA t- 337 T _— 
, i | - . - - ag 3 , Ta: Rant B 4 6 AY 


SECT Stene-un,_20_rry____ 8.0000 
— nas is ADV Exch DIV Resusney's . ; . 7 write -qoalincations 
DIVISION 4 Wired maser, Math Buec Cal j =p tn oll re-| ‘ 4 sal “auate “rave " qual = 
gs, Man.” Proto Supply. “iatea [faery ce en ee Charen St ’ Taree, Sout ada Tes 7 OR, er exee, hydraulic 
000|" Sales exp; some travel 1 ao ¥. ment or piping, $e Liberty St. han a 2. Moateveria, 1888) St i-excell oppty. Room $60, 27 Peart 8t.linion Room 369. 1440 Bway, 0 jee 2.) ct 8 sel t com. a rn berctrwe ‘Ese 
Tolson . hase teapire ot State Bidg eg 


Detrot Hy men 000 Rc 
PROMOTION wetiar stat! bkernd pub- |SALES MGR, Silverware, Nat est ob Ber . = 
Mahe = was exp, not research: res- only. Accus Lrg Sales Force jchan is em s I) e- qreh, ozel tem ¥. " q : Bon . aes 
900- SALES CORRES, Able Writer, Bulk so : . rc - > 4% f at to 2 pred al 
wae — et ie NS Dir Mail 5.206] Bors, work: vere” Brel rect dein betes, |Manaser ‘a mast. 3 Tim — salary retail stres, trex” comm Fat Ciara Ay, Bkn | EXECUTIVES, 
SA ° Mi Travel, ome = -gravel con | eabaala, ss. est ’ ' —— a 
—" M4 witcrest, 1008 man, Sie work; tba ushing. 23300 | 


12:30 AM. x & 2 bkgd 
ans s a 
TRAVELING AUDITOR 54 $3000 Th Con Constr 


te ilbe 
. 


vate tax & franchise i044 '200 200| turns Nwepr ex ia. % 
resume ic Bhi St, Rm ‘ and 
OD man (Phi: pub exp net to $3 900|ADV MGR ABST. Retail Wene Appr ney ber. ¥ Whitenail good pat time. State age : —— . gd pay, midtown. W156 Times. “deal,” 
hosp Manh $3,000) Sales Promo, ¢ 860 ry ew ‘ 
BRKPR PC Eni steno Bronx "foo rBn Sono ha MGR, ‘to 35, Metro wd, gi Tw : _grefieman. te on, ince tx Personnel Serv —_ ¥ Ti ' . rere man tor i ema ht Ww 34 commission 315 440, thm 1812. Cail 9-10. 
am eer = -e pesveugha. 7 900: | FINANCIAL Waiter, : ‘ vt - : q aft’ y r) Bt or comm. Rubin Linchits, LO 5-2770. 
to $2.340/TECH CO 30-35, MY.) Boys, over 11, re eerie Ne .. cy-ma ; ; we mmbat a id BAK rtd Betas 

j ” com! nm : rf mag, com 

ute Pm 


oe IAN Tefrig ie, orer ie-ton $3 ono] ‘Teach exp: A 4.000) a ea | Nat wt 


(3) onx 


Promo vi Me “> 
ros yng slanh Who Be advit 42/080] Devices/Binc satel a a pe eg = een With Times. Sere ee a ee ee Beer aes ok eal._ Write, i Wo. ; x Rae xre 
ss % 4 498 Lon mz) > on : . s, male-lemie, sell Exroer 


7 ] won Rm 
experienced -| pay; R$ B Store, 6 ge og or com pe- 
f tition Gotham, 25 R119 St, S-ll AM. 


ciks rm payable, exp nee 


\CHER 
ATPPER Diller kni typin: 


to a PROVIDENT EMPLOYMENT : 1 Wille 9.15 
CTSIDS resresentarrs, a ee “ital o wilt O OF re \tea i silts "wat te 


2 WEST 
ING veteran cashier. auto co Bx. ..$1,.560) waRInE- sane rec admin. a By 
JR ciks typs offe boys, mangrs . to $1,560) oll tanker chipments, 5-da oar, N 7 sal pochere, Hebe 
ASST bdkkpr-ledecr clerks to $1.560) sTENO, sm! export off. 5- ° ; ‘ 
STOCK clerk, Radio City $1,440 'G cik.. person’) dept & jpee io ' Men. 
“% AM. 830 , a tiem *. esteamatie Gilian @ dan aaa, Gp GaaD Mecsengers. und 4, 


wo nhs Setee eat, or | eruee 
Meab RUNNER rer expen ss $b STOCK CLERK, 5-da a smo Rational for Ag doy, on 
< take oft eh Setoen _Ward, 75 Varick (Canal St.). ; ‘wa . 
REMINGTON RAND F 
& & opr, " base $50 : - | Serroughs machine oper : -. 
MOON NOPRING Sepr. bkge - J Exper, Treating Plant ay. a 
B230Tr- FISHER BKPR, bkge effiuence, permanent HIGH Boating mens clehing Web mt, 34 it. N 
D n. . oo . . a. Hetlbroner Ay (57 St) eve hanle with ex; 
teu ; "Sal — ‘ “men, drftemen, water ete. 
heed $30 je} 


Betnciman, 1 ders, hrs. Stern res, 


oper 
Miss = . BV - a i ’ = : 
ods, sal, details. W306 Times = — . t xingt Rm 538. : o—, ' , : % jean ha :S4 Times " 
: beret Pop Prig. Callen Wares : ; = celters, aloe wpbelslersrs. Kpply CAN be a ae Situations Wanted-—Mal 
CLERK . " 4 : TRA) manager " 
ANSFER clerk brokerage eee © S Bet on eettena, dette, . _- : ; . 4 ee 2 : may Ac, seme a" ¥°Dinice 154 Nassau St sa —Somp\ chee; _highest_ rete. 23297 Times. ¥ aT 
BRPRS & P&S opr on ail mach 440-800] gine tel. S2-Dr wh. 4 ‘pare ‘ ae ~ oft. Pret Co, HA 3.1860. ~— MELVILEE RADIO. GiSTITUTE Situations Wanted—Female “situations i vented sdvertisemnents com. 
Open! Cabinetmakers, expd store ization. Hotel Chesterfield, WwW @. ting . whe wh, eal —" o lice TELEVISION. RADIOLFCC LICENSES I taining the _— 
SANE a bhge clerks ; Open|__ ©>5. an \ : : | levator : job, Pm Pt no Loft’ . |Day & Eve A Veterans | Situations wanted edvertisements con- by ex-service men rf _ nin 
EXPORT clerks and billers ..... Open . Cabineimaker, ' " , r t. Messenger ae ee Pe Pe Sa 10AM-2PM |§ taining the symbol ) are inserted 
Zc eiets. mail mai! om ; Seen 1] WEST 42D ST a } a Tt ; tor ; pay. } et da Whelan Drug, 165 W 46 Bt hm 5 11) we by ex-service men women. aqcouNrant. Pg 
NG! . HIGH Cabinet rman, up. ly Berkshire | o. | Messengers, Golderer, hard and soft, on costume jewel. St aetue ite ata eaiiieape "Osa 
RESnene ttn ore SS Ha Rer Marat cat “au GM MNamtow Radio. aieeay 0, — [Bvain oge beet a |Z Abe Novely, ? slit eng dae ntitos eS] SSH 
etka Tf Ebineter itn its dh, ty Fg - Fg X- Yo - ae a  poredortt at os” wd es _—___|Messer,gers, lg + washer, Prosper! Cendty._ Write H373 Times 
1 mR ROW COR ANN ST ayers Tasee yess, ee ge ; ate ¢ . cer q Austiz res - 7 commercial, 
"ME. Ch pit op to $10,000 furnish: lingeries, pt a experienced ’ . ’ ross AY. : J , -% expd, a salary. ¢ 
7200 ; ’ ‘ 


PROJECT Engr, 
DESIGN maps. concrete forms. 
chemical 


TPVR. test. 
DESIGN _ chem process. $4000 
roog Analyst, bvy ind b’k'g $9000 
RCH Draftemen. tera ed 
REAVvY MACHINE ASSEMBLE 


fle driver. expd con $75 
SR A JUNTANT to $75 


ra $40-45 » contre. ety, . any, 120 J ; ne ee te —— : 
om (Sieh Ray St el a ace 54. 8 lEmetneers, Indetriel cometh y good. opp. mond k = 
1 : , bs = — : ; a 5 . i a 
SHIPPING CLERK, experienced . ays eh “850 ‘ : sncomeal Mr, Olas ay a er a ei wear a Rrative man, Sane ors E 
ae —— —- DRAFTING i ; i led CCTNT, Ce ae 

WIRE ROOM BOYS, Wal! 8 —— ao ay ‘ria " balance, Cae or ~ a a bane! oe , ane autem, 


CARE, eqpeumting Gepertment Orrick HOURS 44 MPO 7PM [pet puetee woe Mr hee 
a a . . . J e : > : : A 
AND MANY OTHER: oo | dl i 2 ean pene vrs “ist om . fle og screatey Soar [sens FREE ane = 
ACCTRATE, 173 Bway—24 Floor mn oe » lie — & 54: a8 “Fue Oe it Fi eo A sha : cre ~. anicai, electrical ume “st Times — * soat-of tom onal a om oe 
CHEM sales, coated fabrics men farant petting Attia: w rnd St. ¢ 386% metal 2 on " ; TEs’ watkineted' , Kicce GI BILL wes - er ‘aiden pa 
YY — und, to pibaineaghtics | Bidg Estimat, Lic 0640 : 


CONsular invoice clk, reecnt exp Nicene waa ap ened, 


CCTS, yng, some cost, alriines Mel ”~ = . » © 
EXPORT trainee, read French steno. | » Won ef Sen . end checkers, clreraht : resume, Mery Bich Ag, wth. lof IN y Geom Trig, aoe wire oe Lr selling A time me with — ts 
cuse, '.. |Otfice mi ote Ins, 330 te: Saal rat | tare erences he rhOUN Py fo Sea ——s 


Sovrs ts Aoewaniant, (heavy. preferably, CP oe is — inate 
resume’ HIGH te tax’ exp Suite 3510, ate x * 
ey ae Sa > nee \Ghonkt PEB- = or re ; Times. Pe ee ialgk eae En a and taxes: ores et time connect, “hair =~" ATS 
8 em ° at was au : > ~ ’ 
ss St a Bae Ha i ee =a ae Sinore har salad oe mtg cee Rae Wyk PS 
. /—E. w25 . some secretarial . 


D&tailer, pre med/dent, BS, . 3800) Kecentant. ¥ with C F A; perm; month! udit 
a :” perm 
ton FS Times ' . 


CREDIT man factor 1 a oy . . 000) uals, sal 
} lexpd; writ 
Sion Ses et omits electro mec |Aesountant exp ‘gate ma with » OF, paresnesti | Coomtal, wcbertenesd™ on products. \Ce : ahs Times, | eee 
and small machine parts exp sano Stale - | aeeee : nto ‘ PER. charse bie ACCOUNT. sEm108 
PUR I x ls, factory Accountant, sem! ao office; ftsm * —_ 14s \ fet rites ants 
eS ED ee, OT ee mee caer Wan Times : : ; MO 4-00. | Gitice ber, : 7p. " . +43 ‘Times, . 
supplies, etc, engineering mare) trades, /“£°. detis a 7 Bowntown. : public exp, excel ret 
CPA, college ut. FS eee Duparqu Ay. : bank teller, NCB maching J 
firm exp, $420) Lf = * af ry orders, 060. 1246 Time ACCT, soml-ir, 6 oF 
pis ihe Goan a np ie ture pai at gal De gut : Se seated Dit toe Salad w oa 
2oTre exp 7 = — ° 
AUDITOR ext travel CPA a pre firm oe write rally, G80 TwnSs fabretn a, 
% per brit fet, wne byy_sr: exer - - ° ye ohn 
AUDITOR exp BBA, COA en sol Apes: details conf, QASEE Times Civil ‘7ms, positon. ; sectat, exp cost, heavy camera Advertisg solicitor 
4 |Personnel Service ( 
BR PROJ chem anal chem, 2 yr exsees| Ae semi-cr, theroagh exe: cf ony: 7, 1. . i gy . > | abt. B 1 4 u Comers , 7 D O79 Times 235 Tt 
_BKPR, FC to 30, downtown, Sd 2080! certified ofc, ‘perm We mes ? | Clerical, we =| = : “ve DOCTOR'S cesi, BN; call grad, 
LEWIS PERSONNEL sERVICE |\Kecountants,” expd, for > permanent Aone carriers, $4) payehiatry; neat NY: sal & ma 
50 BROAD 5ST staff, W299 Times : I git i »- = 
LAW secy-steno $50 ee ote eer ahaa bre 
P & § clerk mY (Clarke Agency, 116 . payrell depi, 
STENOS, to 73 years .. $278 Keet, fr. a — ‘ 
LAW clerk. student .. of on Pip at desire.” was Times 
TRAINEE, 20-22, brokerage... Open somes P 
SYMENT ASKOCIATES, ING \ere, CPA B55 wash gion st ine ne Meetont poet 
18 JOHN ST, 15 MAIDEN LANE Accountant, monthiy audits, 
ESTIMATOR; substitute bide materials: |tifled office, $65. W386 Times 
lass block. tile, brick, etc pen p motion pleture theatres; 
REMAN: toolroom, dies b00 | superviee: state qual; sal $00. Hé iT 
A raw materials, tools ‘ $4320\ Acct, mfg concern; exp cost wk 
Rick. orks omight onifie $2340 - a Neo ! Ee os 
ACK Clerks; night shifts 40) Adv: . Fe 
~ SkobY “Agency ~~ te oooty Fite Fines Downtown, 


BROADWAY man, machry layouts, oe . -\ ' ~ okt : : : A ye , 
MECHANICAL | Engr, supervise mfg; ring eabucatne exe oppy. Box NTS#14, 119W42 [4 be fran, Bool | at .. ’ . ‘ ' ; u 58, : ifcoone . 
. } : . 4 LOT .! x . camp counselor wants - ANT, BBA degree, 
write- 


old established specialty ——s aevie § inyout and predsetian; gr rad |, 2h . De: fer, 5 Mah OF 
resume ‘ . Ager. ht beginns ¥, 05 — ast - ; ;. ! | nity to F 
ASST to mdse mer; mfg concern: — on$ Baltimore a am —_ yey Montague St, 5 Beekman St. t phone. ; ; orton soo hare ‘ 70, | See Ho th. : Mt ose i x ag a ny " GR 3- 7 OTA Crk eh gasli, o 
steamehiy . Dj s 2 3 . 4 . ’ . drives, able 3 Gays weekly Hagi 
LE fon; 3 vet ~~ CON 
Y cP 


Advi sence, all, 

Fw major pid. oppty for round! ——~ opty, ire.’ a” Wie 7 eee Tees beoking; 

e's wht — eee lhsctorns drafteman, must be exp. | ¥ ——+ ; 
West 42 Street Room ly Room 1919, 205 oe aa ad ne ; a1 At ! . 
opywriter-tech. layout, long ex ? . » Gaply, exp, ; 4 Rey os . . : ae. ° . . 
Glerk-pers, to 30 yrs excl dub tree lance: top sal Pargement, 307 } : , : f e. p Av 7 a ener. part- sectr’) . tious, hard 
Clerk, , ed at chu, mite iso's 3s aottok commercial, familiar biack i oth : hip; ; 3 Pimes. ~ , -—- 
layout, color eS — Times 


a "eat, Ciest sate 4 
ec s. m “es ntn 
“BAYLEY 4009 Cle Ww a. Fal equipant fs. a Siren, sie sea Call peda, 


L. ‘Rodgers. Sgr Amembiers. radic dept. ment 
J. & Mgr vaifasie™ in tellecine. Hantice es ee a 6 AY (14). a 
cn on & Hy sal. Gotdsmfth, 
Rees is! _Mr. Friedman. 


es with outstanding 
ia VOCs Voea fiona ——ltes* og  *F- shipeer, 


~ 30 
sa age, al 
pent 50/59; $40 start, ; ss psp mes. 


RAKE SERVICE Asst shipping clk, oversens reterne overseas 
Mon thru Thurs, 10 to 
Ponies 12:30 Jiceman, perm. write age, ete. 23200 Time 


A AGENCY, 220 BswAY 
FOREIGN export mgr 


es. 
_ |Keney Roeented i a 
Sap, rates. $215|Asst ; 
iit, Beas. cor os Fa ; cial, publictn: s o% 318) Si use ; 4} 
bao ttend men-women), exp unnec; " Othe \¢ ran. 
: joo Boot ~ len sors man. BY bua fe Pad =a pe 
rm, le  Rivercrest Sanit, AS 6-O880' $d" "8 S av, 6 f Past’ 2 yy —:- “th whe a. 


4 





50 THE NEW YORK _ TIMES, MAY 1, 1946. | 
gp etone Wanted—Male — Situations Wanted—Male 


sites ees at ae hike ma 
ot yg Ef VETERAND, 30. rok la otis many wast 
tertainment. FiZi-Times, seeks responsible’ position, to sls exec; excel typist. Anything with 
VERTISINGS space salesman, college! , ae future, H3 Times, 
asst adv mgr, exp copy, lay- Die. ns VET A. young, neal, college, 
H202 Times ille-| sales exp; oppty ¢, other 
position  dealred, 3! Times: 416 Times 
Ee FERAN 
screens, know king. im L 1, 2 


7 gg 
ppc St a H315 Times H60 Times 
At ge a i, *7pe- cagreving,| secon: OPERATOR, exp p tuck, silich, Singer, Will WATCH repair, 
* mach. ¢H 3-' ul bi. 
Min kiticit <: a AT wer 1 eee tc 7 linea 
» ing. ens, vi y you 
tion, school. “Have times manne: Awrigues. CRYSTAL Oune 
arch or|_CHINA, WHoueeene: Ged TIMES. _|or sost_} 
field 
*. 


Sinai » - 


ING 
goes creative ideas 


Bkiyn 


exp, sales; ~- 
alee 2 


=e. aE EXPER, Wisnes work; 
|. BENSONHURST 6-0956. 


counts. 
es 
art. 
Erni destener.  detresrw “a . 
Bate" Hot Times, PUARMIKCUET —fonlor_— Blaby ~sxpet- 
canted | ee ‘art editor of 6 maga- sunday rea ov AY B 2. 
intr. itectural, interiors, techal-| 24 sisman fivent Ttdhian "asi Times 


free lance HSS ACIST, . 
. . paste-w yee! Rich son peful 
and studio exp. H357 Times. areas Se ‘st. Bs Di kaa YNGe 
st 


ey 5 
LE! wAN 


). Lowls Jume, 1223 W lidth. A i 
. ambitious, seeks 
eo 
‘ P y recent| & haberdashery ex 
experience, ambitious; pasites win folate a ene 


a ey Fe Ehambermaid-waltros, 
eke conieet. sea sn thle. Hiss nent eoonient refereness.. . Cksmbermé- soe! as ekaH Tam;-ecea 
pirat bee fee nes es wins 
: el id fa 
. desires 
full 


ee ed ed yom 
serks 
for NYC & 


oi Sar ee 


L3 Times. 
ties; 
rumes. 


iran NJ 
Sterne nant "Fr howe, RRL 


; anxious to American|ware, elec es. 104 Tim lyn 
H349 Times SALESMAN on reiall drug trade hewkr 
New York desires line 


Greater 
AXSMESE consi to 


chemistry, 
tower operator. wholesale, retail *nquor bad 


Ree pert with “iatare H193 Times TALEaMA — 


commercial; fast; days; overtime. H 


. BU 6-2848. 


‘ea es wie 


Suns; $18.60. | 8-804. ‘ 
| Oogh-Teasowerir,, one, fell Us, aes ben 
‘ . sleep in-out. Rit «S148 
white, abel teally (3); 
we want G44 Timesls3, 4 B economics LLB. law, expert steno, Greenwich vicinity, ie 
Beet 


ree “in EW Fm whi reel 


rei h nee oo eae small oe 
esst, reporter 


oT rtf eatectad ae 
ty. 


chanical. ‘electrical traint qcaler? ee sec-| TELEPHONE siem: Sap, SR-| Cock, 
ee Sama ebeh tte scien ~funes coun 

- yan ey and retail’ inter@tted im any rea- 

241 Times Bx, |sonable offer. | “Fin Times 


na A personnel college, rayons: att even! 
rance oe Hae? Times. fous for textile tuture Ie 
os 
with fu 
my 
converting STP ke See F22 Times. |child; sleep in; 


*. 
vilian. ‘ter- 
sek, neg rooutaane my nindet “Gr” Bl; “Th "sear legate seen out 
T acte. no H304 Times. 
coll grad exp ails, procedure, x in- and die maker, vat T 3 ooo 
ve = a i eli, —— 
Fits lity persons mes.| small precision pa’ own layout. 


conscientious worker 
asians, i 4 


WAITER, first class 
oré of background beyond 


sales-credit: BBA accountin 


school: ans-|Gees 
1171 Times. 


eas surr 


° yre 
‘ogrammetry, geodesy, 
| Times 


Sens 2 a oo tion | hswk, “i chook nila ce eal. Cin 
with piers. re, M2 Tre = woman, “home, sea- 
repraech, ‘te 5 actin 

summer eee le 


asst mgr hea! ee = sail in er a =e ihe NY, on ~ 
i Ba ac, a work. WH re oe care Gin, _howsewt: re doo fai 
477 Times. a. sie MAN y, with new t-ten cooking, 


: aia rrPiste: (wat a 
ta es e mes. ) in, " 


sr i nD 


mt} | 
Sinegw 


with f 


a daeil PET geome ks Peace 
Glub; work 


Times 
Wah tee VETERAN, 1, per? Knldg German, Vial- |Governess- 


Te ian, French, t seek import- 
Rate eaprt ows 18" Timens 
div 


NATe: bepni bat des” with | 
i wii ence oft ,. posi 


Fat . Y years’ exp, 


Barth. 
dependable, V - 
i an rany fine -Glts mes a vera. “shipping dept. dress man, future aE 
Times Heessheoper cook, = 


-_ = rd ents | Fetes ana wt all ob eae bu Peete bees ee 


agent visiting N YW desires slde- oe semen: 
tt es yest: exeel terr only consiq- Nae, ‘3, dedires 


tion with future; eeping, 
MACHINIST’ Sa helper, veteran, wishes) count! und. H4z7 Times. 


el B_.-j 


aie; 
ite, 
tr. tt, single, desires poaltlon abroad,| State age, Hationality,_ LY 
a at al F's Sha ta 4-0 
les position phonosraph ‘store. Box ony. Waid as lhe 
= urs, 


ba 
Wek os .-— “Ta sheet aa ref. rete i131 E 93. ‘at = Fae [cae 


tes ce co tar 
ge Pe 
Se a Baraat eas hay 


vical 
Sea Fae ie 


wr’ ambitious, 4 desires wirine Tr '3-0320 
VETERAN 
, Bight ich courses. 


eduite, 


aw i Ean 
0. 104.8 mts ade. wins 


12 yrs’ retail bust 
ate th N 


desires ab ot with repnsbity i308 Tunes ‘ = ‘an 


Times. 
mach shop exp. ¥ yre|900_ Grant Ay 
133 \ Hewkr | 


Peases Sravina’. Ys “ames re- | Cham - 
hed? See ne Seat ae pie 2 


Household Help Wanted—Female Household Situations Wanted-Female 
, wants fsewkr-cook 


busnss 
ae 
Bronx. JE 


cook, xpd, 


out 5- 


op, weep | Pernt — 


| AY at 9-877 


OHA “ 
“bey B Ome ber; e;_ city, ¢ 
Tan Ti te 
4-7r schl bey! 
‘ 2-2306. 
sal. AC 32-7511. UFreuds. 
seashi, el, "oth hip, $150. mes. CHAUPYEUR, 


ora in, pln 


eatin rete. ae Sere ne darn, Bn 30 
sane Te, 


Narsomd, icep-tn, 4 enidra sty pos 
yj eA : 


Nursery gov, 
servs 


3. 


, summer 
rt care 2 childn. VA 6-165 


nursery, 


“4-y0 
EN 
ehlidren; 
71-0328. 
emall api; ref; deep 


Oi ‘ellen, Jane . 
ia ei heewk (sitter) “i | . 
ae 5a pees 


tty tae ae Le 


«x ’ 


—_——_— — 


Merchandise for Sale Wanied to Purchase 
Geid, Jewsiry, Ete. Wiatea * 


vor aad hellew, o- 
high 
dies, . 


m,n aioe gas Zoo m7, 
easy terms tee Mr. oot. 300 @ | ranged. Modell's, a 


ately aan te 16 EB as 


—* Sftsk Foetal oa ee 


room 
Te hes Co 
A Wenghl-208 see 2. 3 


(24th) ee 

1 Wanted 

TURNITURE 

a-brac Tvortes 
|Chins Lenene-Setentel Regs Paintings 
antiques 

Diamond and Gold Jeweiry 
Music Bowes 
Baby Grand Pianos 
Grandfather Clocks 

WwW OTH 


Mesclaadise ter Sale 


Merchandise for Sale 


7s COOK," b ble 


BARG. 
4 furniture 


te wht will” 
e 


Sets a8 ‘Cie 
mele, art, ait ; must, dis of immediate! ana 5 
cersuly il biy. Cyt 2285 bet ween + 
nor 


reasona 
Princt i. only. 
Glassbake, San- machine 
woman, tintone. Orchard Crystal, Leart-Lucite|machine, 1 
machine, 1 
L 29%, joiner. 1 lock corner 


3-drum sander. ALL WITH MO-! eng 
TORS. CEPT HOG 
‘tide Le ft, 42-05 97 F 


vr tert ae 


SPOT CASK 
OA le 


— cott: dresses 

wer on 
SS ret at loss. 35 Stone 
one BO 9-34968 


‘ ANTiaoE Weesiwhiis chesi, 


small cherry 
4-017, e bureau, pair decorator’s Chip- 
home work, sheik |pendaie ‘ove seats, primitive portrait of 
“ ® specialty, MO 32-5937, child, odds ends ween 10 and 
g MEET ectered, vel.) orrese one ez|McLaughiin, — ne see a L 
wm children, no inf 


; summer sea- te 
ferred. G46 wality, h 
"| -— cal, takes one only | broad! part eee See eon 
whete er help is kept. G4é7T lish sofa. hall tabi mirror. 
;| NURSE, 8-12-20 hrs; edulis only. Laii-| 2247. Princt 
dinette, bedroom, 
;|NURSEMAID, ute Maite f(s Karastan 


Ae Gay eae ecseamiate Stnahet; sleep in-|) 
ater haa veal a 


MU 2 


FAMCO #6- 
— x RO 


year old, includes 
nak twin tables and 
: te be sold . 


er no room, oak 
ag 
materi VERSITY rzs 
14% UNIVERSITY PL. (NEAR 14 ST.) 
i ew 


i] (for den). 
in excellent condi 
morn. 


with motor. 
tor bypass valve and safety 
jacketed nettle 
and speed reducer 
TTAN CASTINGS, INC. 
Av, Paterson, N J 


ype. TOR SETS 
Pirstsc*tuteriu staf 


UNT?T 


| PMS SP eet 
P Y HUNTER 
© TEXTILE 


ORTHODOX AND LARGE STREETS 


“S 


S-in sheathing, 25,000 of 
. 6-8-10-12-14-16 ft | 
seasoned. 


single stage. acting water cooled, 
with dual control and complete belt drive 


ences; city, ent 23 iO meters, 
a 4-127, aot SP L/10th to 1/20th HP. any yo ad 
x, 4 es Phone Mich 
refs; will travel. WI 2-7600, Apt peer ecrsaae 
Royee exp; 


” v7 \8_Fimees, 


heed, vise a : private, Fee 


manaefacturing 


Seite 1%, ag 
L band s 


stehsts 


; country pid. 
bea: CHALPYEUR, 


ahar.| ELECTRIC HOISTS a 
HAND LIFT TRUCKS, REVOLVATOR 5 
ww £- CONVEYORS, SKATE WHEEL TYPE : . - 
A-1 cook, some garden: ks, Platform \ “y 
on, Rial basse Tomy "Chas Watts, om 1267 FI EV 71-9460 J. : $ 

ee — —E 4 J 

Meng a _|sgar os ae tar oad ty 

, ; Ww ‘ef; |e pelders, Rockwell ae on sem. one ons Fi 

7” ; coal . in, electric drill 

press, hand operated; on 
Singer-Merrow machines for piece 

a R 7-0635 


“tide metab 
x pera, Rauity Ths W y Y. 
a ee SS Beh, aoe 

or 18 gauge, 22434 Times 
Mig ee W oe. Gl Ww. 
a he iireindel & 

rie W oth ee 

and 31-15 in stock nan | ERE “aa, , 


ww & B®, 
Co, 238 Rock- abo alle ~¥ } 
— “later " wim ander sticner,| sticker, wanted i? hn 


malted /H16-2AG 
Beach, rd new oF wed, ‘Sil = mornings, FO ae) 
Otties F Store Fixtures Wanted 


one radial 
table saw. 


=. oa aed 
, o 

Baisley Bivd,) Wolfsen 
RUESCH 


Yellow 
4x6, 44, 


It, smooth baked finish 

L 90-5417. 
, one 
one| 


shaper. . 
RH 4-2225. Cleveland’ a utomatic screw machine: also 


ry 
ff others 

804 Lex'ton AY RF 
, jother a ‘machines Good work! - 
"Idition; reasonably priced. CAnal iss. 


chauffeur: 15 years ‘exp. 


New and used 


Lea & Clud 
All attachments—excellent conditios Storage 4& Biueprint 
+1 my Bt 


anemme:|er: Folder: Burrow 


:| writer. 
TR_5-8570. 


ees ore 
Bag Te. - ny pew in exedlient condition. 


1338" naw S Center. 360 State St, Bridgeport, 
Cona 32-4188. 


Technic, 23 W . 
44117. ippabsecoRAped. “ss 
ior — Wm. Stern, 


— ithe , Minch platen, |head 


web. “Butfalo Sor 


bie pet Moa av, Nt, Lana 
ore 
311 B Tl st, NY C. 
Comeres ond tqu 


Leite enlarging lens, Ernemann 
Gays.|ernostar 1000 speed, complete outfit. 


WANED rae ope 
oats Sa 
me cess 


vereh Merida Cemetery, Rocbele Park, Nd. 


eg Baton a Ete = . 16) and 
ce etnpieyment Agencies =a 11000, "case, ically new; * Mane|termee Contr at 1 pe Tee ar ae 
= Wit 2 a = ea, re et ie en A cae 
esnaing, are 


= beverage, 
ere. ectric ibe heaters 
2 ren ADVANCED ‘REVRIGERA FING 00, inc | TIC MFRS! Band saws, 
pi Times iets 


, heuseworker, reliable, 


or Indy; afer dinner; good ref; $45. Eggert, 
"Ch 3. SFLS. E 1034 


i 


& Lexington 
4, travall tela ‘also sele selection small 
ren $7 (vith AY) 


gM mpi 


Lge 
503 W S4th. CI 6-583 


Corpets and . - 

Tee Sennen roe oo aa Peer Y ta os ports 

p By t converors OAL 3 Bole sort 

as- 13" ra. 320 volts, 
tt 71-0065. 

ate installation in swronga Hors cinnat! ene fog "a Lass a 

yi) LiKe wed $i a sale. W. ale Wa Sian, pd Wooster 
ay vos saad sand 


inese 
STH AV (33) Punch Indus- 
Sales 100 Perry Bt Buffalo, |0 


trial ¥ circle, T- 
-|N_Y¥. Phone Clev Cleveland 1534 fob maeeoreie, LI 


, a GR T 
bike % . | 
uminum in original cases 
: M& E DESIGN CO. RA 8-830 
slightly curved, id 
Walker "yy oe £1904. 
aiverd 


uw } 
‘4 " and i sie 
co, RN 9 i8st 


For Slightly Used or Worn 
LADIES FUR COATS 
Chokers. Jackets, — wo 


WE ALSO PaT 
EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH ra ror 
USED MEN'S CLOTHID 
sons ag. alt GEeT ay Orren 
mco iw 
| dean 5 AV. WI T- 7 
HIGH prices c. tor men's sed salle, 
overcoats, tewear, etc wil esll. 
| sacobe, es Co umbus Av. AC 9-500. 


for tmmediaie deliver 
pton wsed cloth 
ret 2- een Paes “pisabet ‘Tlothing” Exchange. Tae ker 
bores 
eyes and hangers es | | PHONOGGRAPH records Wentet — a 
Miller modern classical. Complete libraries. old 
pow aA LE, 5.00 sled telding hale. stocks purchased. Cive details. Herbert 
MO nit Laughlin, 44 Riverside Dr 
CUCITE, pina lame Tr tome Pp sWeeTS 
O 2-783 uge + ix, el voted, 
metal oa", below ef or v <= 
= . ME a ade an Bayern, Lavemeyer hemes 
SHTIQUE becanet  Gecled~ eather lower WLICON: SYREL. SHEETS. 
Ete ae Time 
fer treat- 


ll teanatormers wanted for export. F206 
table - 
a condition. LEhigh 4-224 Coprel theta, cant 
5 fir, 


SALDWIN GRAND” 
QUEEN ANNE MODEL 
Ww 1 5 
er 
#! 
Beautiful Tone and Design 


— Quantities; 
Cats, Dogs o and Birds long. Barry) 


0 9 OLLIE Sas saint re 
tm ma te; rea- 


let machine, Kuz Lofiner double, ST 
6145. Hill Plastic Co, 10-11 40 Av, Pie ale 


ION FOR 


Knabes, 
sale, reasonable, ori 
ES, STORES. FACTORIES! compressor, 4x4, 82-gallon tank __ Powers Y STth. 


—~—B— - J ans = 
ar 
Chickering 


aes) Also storage 
or 


Lae mt rs : 


- wens ut Tine ete 
cEEERS aE: ee lek fell Felly mtler- GRAND, nang: also 
a, ” 4 -8190, make baby grand - Babel 126 w sd 


f i. structural —" 
* pipes, reinforcing steel. str ural * 
"abst, dressed | wanted. Call McCann & Proner, 480 7 A¥ 


rs=-| PLY Woop, A panels oF 
new, any quantity 


‘Sess sae wanted, tch low 


a 290 — a ees Cameo. 


hae 


wani- 
Howard, 
= rh 


ie, sab 
— a. 


ts lent co: 
cellent Saiinee on he Mig tala 
assaic, assa 
a} shear, 


EPP emblnation brake, Ore: 


ver machine, foot press; | a only 
7 . 


prompt de- 
Modern Kiln Mire ‘american & 


PRIGERATORS 


ean fy natarday, bel before tbe paral “A Ake 


' nabe, Cileheriag, anted to Fosenens 
sible Hiee. upriahas bes, hose 0s’ W Nth | “Wealacse—O¥iee Mh ae ar WinreD 
Fortest PL 3-7 "hernias sae Teas at |p 


— 
nationally known, . ~~ plenell” euiil 
66 Court St, also 100-drawer cabinet. G 


machine, 
Bal. MA S-4270, Mr. Seckler 
Ting XV dn “XVI dee mbar mee SUSINEAS ‘machines, les. sale, office Tur: 
condition, may be seen by ap- re [em Renney, 777 Bway Tae ror 
Sk 


CO 717-2231 
ae ont See sce Ha 
=. T-4F--: _ 2489. 
. B. Pires, 215 


Serv 
~mm camera REDUCE, LOSE WEIGHT. Spot Redectiad 
er party. 5228 Times. | No diet—drugs—bdaths—exercise—salts 
raphic, atiachmenis,| Steam massage. Trial visit $1.50 Female 
Su? view camera, se MA 6-3251 -y~ x. ger T 
Cerpets ond 4 Waated her _ Institute -7e08 
& ORIENTAL RUGS BOUGHT Ce aE AB as 


CASH—IMMEDIATE ATTENTION (iq Ess OPPORTUNITIES 


Condition—Exceilent Prices Paid 
RE s gua OFFER 
tle —_ a Reet ran 
oOuTrsT plasiles experts wand 
partner to take over runni unusual, 
mt. Neo- 


.. 25 5 
osperous plastic fabricating 


pr 

essary capital, $40,000 pe mes 
RUG CO.. rioders Mah ice, | spp rriGWaL Splat te expansion by 

a CE PAID FOR USED Rice. ot*>shed costume jewelry wholesaler 


3D pa a ea ME 5-215 [Times ability +equired nasi 
mn 5 rans ot) outta at He 


ehaned 
ufman, 1213 


ty is Tawe ~- 
van —— 


offs, small or lores santities.. EV v t-ezt, 


WikE, git & ei8, bright ; any 
ene Freedman, GR 5-5422 
LBS Si5ctéxi44, slaminem 
VI 4-500). 2 pa 


M a 
w 
4 ae McNichol, rt ‘Deey RE 2- ti90 208 rene pinsoal gy By By lore noon. | ~ 


apart et we ony na pl 


2 li 


consist pire, 

ite ey eee 

“ breakfrts, 250 2500; Racmi f 
en rhe, 308 to mies onina 
e LLoy . 116 B60 st 


cares 
prices. all * shoppe 
m3 ae "as (bet 180 “shen In Jats) 


Ld 
removal 
White Plains, N 


lor 
chea Write PF O 
. 1A yd y151 
ITY—SELL Pn Aad 


machine;| be ry ai = ver 72 ben 
sy sSORDITION. ce vies 
a oe _ paints 4 sides (also rails). we 3-0234. immediate deliv 


P| aiton,_ tow Sow spprating,” st i in = nee ee 


gyreiding machine, sia- 


— — — wy exp 

$15,000 required 

in business foes one 

ed|LOOKING for partner 
$10,000-$18,000 to alter 4-family bdullding, 

location in Williameburgh; will be able 

to have apt for self V §-pe7S 


wan “for sete 
| your self cars; Cg Psa one-68.600 for 
Exreni ENCED. cctive 
562 6 AY {Entrance 46th) 


6878 ae 
me. yn? | VETERAN, 15 years experienced in od 
GIMBELS wit! vertising window display, seeks rtner: 
ARLS. SMALL LOTS O ner a contacts. op- 


WELURY OF 
oO 
| VE play techs partne 
PHONE MR. VAN AT rs portunity Times 
« Contineed on Following Page 


artnerant — 
Times. 


44-inch Dealer, aT Times, 


| rosewood belld your peste. VARIABLE condensers—3 small 
xm ‘ iniceioah 
" mass top. $125; Atte 138 Cottinbia’ St em a j| radios. 12A6 tubes 
tubes) . 
t 


GORTON sD . wilica. gel tmmediate 
other machines Mitchell 2 4, +. - ataliatie os 


natural fabric, heavy type.| Times Downtown 
ea PEL aes Le aly Hara 
mes. cases. High Bridge, 336 Canal St. NW ¥ C 


lok corner AMATEORS! rac ot 44 oargains; one QUANTITIES 
xt 222 surpl. B.D Co Doysiasty " Lf na 


Barry “0, 
_| maple bedroom sets, etc. BOTORE, 
1 te/ Ay, ewiett, LI, Franklin 2292 | rpm, 
SOFA, tuxedo style, tufted. fine rose kid, Vi “DW OMRI' a 
mohair; like new. WA 6.1118 r eal 


. 


revels Inery 


5. 0601, 





BUSINESS otal flo, 
Wanted 


tal te invest 


for 


pe 


io vent Te Te | gi 


PLASTICS. Wiari your St so 
mediately with or eee 


transparent astic, 
pers dene 


dentification cards crate 


wire for free folder 


MURPHY Of 663 Sante ve 


eeies 71. Calif 


posraars pete read 


sales or 
ho office and st 
pect well 
come, give 
arte 


t 


estab) 


URE) 


Soe wrens 


an large vay 


T 


photos| available, ae New 
-| available, , wae” 


eee 


“manager, with 
ng new, every 

in America « 

=> unusuwa 
and phone 


: a") J al 


eel)- 
chaing, seeks an 


wo yt trays, 
serie 


ft, 7° out 
} i= 


RAVE PACKAGING PI 
We aeaten Lb 
Give. Weer product n 
Give_ Your m 


fo 
= 


an" ae 
Times 


Printing toed eaelling 
a lithe offset printing of books, folios, 
etc, are invited 
this matter with one of New York's largest 
WT79 Times 


ere 


contractor desires te ¢ 
manufacturers all types building mia: 
rials; have office and o= fact) 
wil work as jobber representati 


me 


of 
tes 


cones 


Dections 


ve 


with’ jovbers a4 3 sia Sate 
’ ; 


exp 


capable of han- 


A 
te discuss BRAUN MFG CO 


ng. Kastern. Pin 


& distributors, wishes 


organization 
connection with legitimate manufact 
appliances or metal 
sell commission basis or 
S36 Tyess. 


feet in 


ny} Posmeler making con- 


nc 
to represent agency or 


Bot 144 chortotte, oo a = 
palted almond anthem in yey 


for additions! lines at 


ore stores hardware stores, 
Box FS224 Times. 
e- mgr, ex-major, will tre 
from Western Mass home: 


manufacturers 


sonst sepoly of material ana capital 


Terminal section: 


pawns: 


ors of embossed vinyis, Offered to high 


ext for 


mis OS Go, Ene 205. Ls 


State V OF) 
ht manufacturing. . 
ME 5-1316 
ing chains, ” PLASTIC 
‘xporters 


ood ties, open to make 
nd ait pee C 


EP peop 


Bull 


elp 


ore pletely bet" 


eh co ea gat, ght ott 


yen representation. ‘anything 
nect 


ous $-—— contacts retu: 


Cy oe 


good contacts, seeks position > 
See 
Bird, Broox 


PRODU 
rejects 
trych tires tubes oar 


: 18,e0e 
material: 
. various 


Li) tar 


Batten oe Bren 


E85" 


= a 


eed 


ice 
iF. pn0s, 
ae fer 


aril 


‘SS (PLATING 4 POLISHING) open’ nelle] 80 that the shower areas move 
Ly cadmium, ~~ 


ae stiteh-down * welts 
23490 Ti patented baby 


MAP PREPARED AT U. 3. WEATHER 


aca \* 
$2 
Winnioeg 


PLY WITH THE WIND 
wi 


ar 
WEST WIND ° 


Ma. Figure beside Station Circle indicates ourrent temperature 
(Fahrenheit); @ decimal number beneath teinperature indi- 
or tation in inches during past twenty-four hours. 
front: a line between cold air and a massa of 
hcrnaitaln under which the colder air pushes like a wedge, 


hy my southward and eastward. 
Warm front: a between warm air and a don pay 


pedge of colder air over which the warm air ie forced as it 
; 2, usually northward and eastward. 

Stationary front: an air mase boundary which showe little 
no movement. 


Occluded front: a line along which warm air has been lifted 


The Summary The Forecast 
A belt of thunderstorms andiwaw Cone cine anD VICINITY. 
showers are occurring along 
te or\nearly stationary front extend- 
“ling from weste 
Middle’ Atlantic States, ~K— 


belt oscillates back and forthigastern 
cooler in the interior 
coast tonight. 


NEW woes Fae cloudy and 
Se Se and on 7 


ting Corp. northward and southward cov- WESTERN N NEW YORK—Partiy cloudy and 
ering a wide area as a whole; covler today, Cloudy and cool 

runs, 
but the active showers af any|wew JERSEY 

Atione time is not more — gl a 

about three hundred miles wide. omnia 
Some of these showers & NEW YORK RECORDS 
heavy especially in the South- Teen. He Hu Tem Hu 
west amounting to two t 


z 
3 


Seeteeewurb 
iddadadadaes 
KEEKEKEKKEKK 

ee 

De le be de ee | 

RRZEEKEREE 


is likely that a low pressure 
area will develop in the South- 
west. Under these conditions 
ja period of rather heavy show- 
ers may develop over 

Northeastern States and 

followed by cooler and drie 


§ Sescetecers 
222 


ve 

fl 

KS 
“t 


7 

>. 
i 
be 


Hit 
glass 
aes 

es. 

“Ee = 


Hh 


a 


tomor-| yesterday the temperatures given are the|San 


pas. mas. | ing ts twenty- 


ST amarillo 


Miatiantic City ... 


41/ Birmingham , 
1 Biemarc 


RADIO TO 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 


10-10:45 A. M.-C. 0, N.Y. ame 6 
be ow a 


2:10.56. 0. ¥. on Wring WYO, 


See Gemely of 


ee, A a HT ra Bs 


Op Ton Tart 


oe 


DAY 


1946 
NEWS BROADCASTS 

from 8 4. i. through 11 a 
tine over WMO4—870 -y 


Spuringse Conferences ° 


“Aida, 


—WOR., 
th, Paulette God 
© From 
Gordon, Thelma Carpenter, 


me WMCA.. ‘a 


1019:30—Great Moments tm Musi: oe T 
sage Charis moar 


from the earth’s surface by the action of the opposing we 
of cold air. This Ufting of the warm air often causes 
tation along the front. 

Isobara (solid black Hnes) are lines of equal bar 
preseure and form pressure patterns which control air flow. 
Labels in millibars and inches. 

Winds are counter-clockwise toward the center of 
sure systems, and clockwise and outward from high- 
areas. 

Pressure systeme usually move eastward at an average 
movoment of 680 enlee © Gey ta the summer end at 6 rat0'@ 
700 miles a day in the winter. 

Greet amount this month, 7.04 
an — ae meath, it hag Norfolk 
A. M., B.D. T.,|Qklahoma City 
. 5 ” "Omaha 

M., 1; 6:30 


a level—T 30 


D.T.. | Porti 
ey sets teat EE M., tor". age 
metropolitan area 


in the 
OTHER TEMPERATURES 
In the following record of observations|/$an 
at United States Weather Bureau stations |Sand 


een 
P.M, 


ra 
ighest and the lowest durin, ane = the are Sault Ste Baris, 


-four hours from 

(All recordings are in Daylight Seattle 

ioe Time } ‘wane 
Official Temperature 


“os Low. tavion, Weather. 
eo 


pnbictsh baisene cttabseess 
S4GuSerecesseceeresrcces 


Washin oa ee: 
TMissin. 


Fire Records 
Tecsday, April 3, 1946. 


Abilene 
Albany 
a 


* 
= 


Atlante 


| Baltimore ° 

‘Binghamton . 7 

nee SD &. 
ea 


w amour Manor 
Smith 


CS—Conside 
NG—Not given 
MANHATTAN 
Am Location Occupant 
3. 4>-260A_W. 27 Bt. not given 
155-122 B, 4 St 
Cloudy 
Cloudy lp 
t 


Cloudy 

Cloudy 
udy M BROOKLYN 

rt. clay “e008 shepherd Ave.; 

Clear man ; 

Pt Crayip 

a 12 ss ~se0 Ave, J; Pred Goldberg... 


+:58-1 3 St; not given , 
1:25—192 Greene eo not given. SL 


i mat - Jy St.: auto, not one st 


utgers Pi: not given 


WEEE at aenan 
Wa: Bo big at 


ureh Ave: not given... 
M.; not 


ford . 

3: 45—1902 

Bee iy 
S—384 Baltic St 

H isa Ez. “ “Rot given aL. 
00— 46 Bushwick Pi.; John Mastro- 

osccdounn 


tecenanetsetoetsescsvseenet e 


— 
- 


Restaurants, Bars, Orills 


erasers. os 
‘25307 Richardson 8t.; + 
: BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES “te 2 
FeO) nd LICs i " 1 aiem aL 


MT deics 
}oods | 


SUNDAYS. 
CE $25,000. WRITE 


‘| tank 


Ys, 
— Z3461_ TIMES. aes 
rt. pot loca on: Sy jon ayn near: subway, 
Large liquor i; one tions. ° . : 
D COMI total we $3. cash which con- 
i rook! ot on dollar for dollar basis; |> 
MOCER scallent corner, , sel to other interests 
ipals onl rua 
y 
2 ® 
pene for 7 
whens Spurs mill, i 


"ay -¥4 
Figh-guality goods. Leathert 
eae ae Pee Gotan ee an 
mumer- 


is|_iarey. et income” on Ee gee eh toa 


ty eae eg 


abouts 


200 esta! 


SUSINESS and property for sale, $36.606,|", 3:4 ené 
I 5 _ stores, Pod  —-- Hills: truck: B 
miles from Times! §:45-Skillman Aver and 50 St.. 
* alt me __peeminss; auto; William auto; William Daly ....°. é _ hao 


swalt-var| United States S Supreme Court 


le, situated busy a pele high 
Special t6 Tas New Yorx Tuces. 
mn the Su- 


89 op- 
room yy ee adjoining. toe rent pine court oe 
WAS April I 

256A, Kast Norwich, Oyster rt of the United States toda 
Wisilme.|? Shedden, Ernest J Klien 

ain of Milton” Fisher, 

& night club near New York | james o Hara 

lig permit. Don't missin... West 
ot write immediately jer ciai * 

insky, 1709 Main St. Stratford |=!clair Hateh, 


— B 
° 
TMMEDIATE § Joiners of America, petrs., 


5 

Established gasoline, fuel a distributor wtee of 
usiness, entire Suffolk County, includes| )°-The Bay 
trucks, vending = and in- Gasnent Moin pA 


hit t-war sales 
y fis ose 41s,boo See depending a har 
ioeh>_ Times wi Mfg. Co., * 
and fully equipped care. 
s, 70 pogase. in villene 
bon ike with struction 


Wabc_Youns Dr Malone 
Pee gin Ronit 
NST "willlame. hee” 


Dumey. 
, bg wae McCormick, News 
. WOR—Johna J. Anthony 
Road of Life 
WnYC-Drema Time 
v. the United = fener ay Bea: 
‘counties District Council) ™ EAF—The ant 
of Carpenters’ off tn United Brotherhood! WOR—Daily 


a 
Two 
opportunity. 

Pol 


Me sd -- 


it Stal es ' ; 
urchio |e fon vades Coukell. bdr. ont 


» Phone Greenwood 3-- Ce., 
oF eats MPurmber ind “Sth 8S" 
spaces; ° m, ¥, - 
ferry Wolf,|ment 
submitted — oetr, 
Council of Carpenters , 
iio and for petr. No. nd 
BEAUTIFUL NURSING HOME| 40-—Defense 
* qrareting: situated 20 miles|County of Beaver, 
rooms 


main build 4\4| Finance Corporation substituted as & 
ths; vottage. _ > or yy lant in pl of Defense Plant 

propert 

Sp aa 

Dowell Floral rk 


le 


li; 
gen welca_Heip Wanted pate 
WsIZ—Walter Kiernan, 
wex uste to -y 7] 
:10-WABC—Bili Costello, News 
orp. WEAF—Serenade to America 


= use 
adjoining lake: 
garage, selli 
appeiniment only, Me- v 


y equipped 
t Num 
: ber jear|iand @11), 108, aod cand Sor) 8 
cash security. Fleiss-|%10, 611) and #7 


rn | State Guard Orders 


tented theme 
Special to Tas New Yoax Troeus. 


eral al released the Taiowina “Giese sop, tay” 


in Hotel Wentworth 


Agener for sale. Kstab- Eustace, “Capt. 


“for sale, only 
ay central Meation; open 2 years,/| talion, 


to 
hg to train. Inquire 8 & 10 W Front > 
ed _—____— 


Headquarters 34 Battalion as 
read ~_—" aie ation apne 
ua oo tte 
lst 4ist Cav., 


toes ed Baten . Mth Inf, t 
talion 

, lst Truek Battalion. 
lt. M., 34 Div, to Mead- 


eg See, 4 ee x. GG, tm Int, 
nite hilte eeal clan Fr: W., Téth Inf., to Mead- 
aT fase lier 4 ae L. Téth = Int., 
~ |__| a r . State Det, hon- 
GREAT MOMENTS 
IN MUSIC" 
SONGS OF MAY 


Sy office for sale; profitable prae- 
tice: 30 years at this — Ly "aide 


»| Manhattan tring accoun i) to 


track 
»| Redfield, 
i 


Room 36 — <= 


soya, | 
). S-tamities, 4 
“Foros bn ual 


Bet Abas Call 


TONIGHT AT 10 P.M.,£.0.7. 
WABC - 880 
Celanese Corpor ation of America 


Oheg. Y. & Pas. Orr. 


FOR COMPLETE 
COVERAGE 
LISTEN TO 


. 1] 


r 
“ur 


ital 


mest ret 


00 P.M 1:98 P. yas 


ER eee a it 
BBE ARS ET 


ESS, wees: ome 
wre —Health Tal = 
AFTERNOON 


Sitar retin 
Shige 


WABC—House Party 


Art Series 


Story 


‘ 
. 


out 
ihe Walutee she, 
WAVE teary” Metect Maske Manoa” 


wor | Ded a> 
reese eer Sar 
BAP A Woman of America, “ 
Fos em ee new 
see eae tere, es, Boe 
= 
nee-wnake pin Youngs family 
wor— With Gambling 


w 
w ne 
: Giants ve. M. 


w 
3: 00- 


Waiter A Ene 3 


Louts 
WNYC—tcience Talk 
Ww —News. veep Muste 
ahaa ve | te Haoviness 
ow Wite 
w Matinee 
Ww. Thow 


a 


WNYC-inden 
WQXR—Man 
& Ws-WHN~ Racing 
ove 


nf Bese 


2erce 


ee 


Seestsesesewen ES on 


tate ' ; 


: 


Le 


22222? 





f 


cil 4 


' of the beautiful 


OFFICE FURNITURE 


S 3 bore mt 
REGAN 
FURNITURE CORPORATION 


278 MADISON AVE. (at 39th) 
Ashland 4- 8599 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, MAY Il, 1946. 
|would only act‘as a preventive of! ¥ 


CLARK & GIBBY AND THE NEW JOIN aN vie FIGHT AGAINST bcos BR ADLRY CONCEDES ee a 


CPA GROUP TO RULE | THE OLD. 
F * ey aadine / . aig alte 7? oe ; OER Ry cia fo TER Grigg # | ww 
THE UP-TO-DATE OLD-TIMERS. ON BUILDING HERE RS aR | Side ae Bae HOUSING I (ITY ever ieetetiten-cnt she 
Ser the cilimata to See ok. , Mis! 43 ws rai nity , * Cons 3 : | could be, a means of fixing valua- 
Bes: Sunline. .cam epee: siltaseehicsdeilielhieimatinit sae ae eek ha Pa ote > Bas vied \ iG We eae ee tions for mortgage lending. 
custom-made, you owe it to {/Eight-Man Committee, Includ-| | oe ek tee Ger ae 


Our highly skilled decorators i . 
will help plan your office to All Non-Housing Projects 


meet individual tastes. 


vt lee we ag 


Aeroh oe 


dee 
-. , 
4 
“pe 


Good Tecms on Houses Is Aim 


“All agencies concerned are 
working together to reach a solu- 
tion that will not only provide 
housing but also make it possible 
for veterans to secure homes on 
Special to Tus New Yoru Tums, terms in keeping with the intent 

WASHINGTON April 30—Gen-| f Congress, * the statement said 
. The chree officials concurred 
eral Omar Bradley, Veterans Ag-|that Mr. Pavesich’s statement last 
jministrator, conceded today that) week ‘has led to an erroneous im- 
in some cases houses built under| pression that FHA processing of 
veterans’ preferential priority are|Priorities has been improperly 
not going to veterans, but said|4one and has resulted in housing 
that pending legislation should re-| Prices generally higher than justi- 
move some of the difficulties =. 
which have been experienced. , a condition of ma- 

He joined with Wilson W. Wyatt, |‘erial, tabor and land supply,” it 
National Housing Expediter, and| 8s explained, “there is little uni- 
'Raymond H. Foley, Commissioner formity either of estimate or ex- 
B’wa 20 E. 41st | of the Federal Housing ‘Adminis-|Petience in the industry on cost of 

y boroughs. tration, in explaining some of the| Oullding. FHA has been required 


wh baa Ls $997 | "CE emtare of te comiin SR ash selene so of hey CPA Civitan Proactin A 
“== are Brig. Gen. John Reed Kilpat- 5. |which have given rise to criticism.| overing actual costs, plus profits 
irick, president of the Madison s Be The controversy was started| g e »P Pp . 


: . and to determine that the.proposed 
ete te eee Saturday by Francis P avesich, | Sale price bears a reasonable re- — 


head of the Veterans Adminis-| 

Congress; Peter W. Eller, presi- tration’s loan guarantee section} eee an? cnareto, = to eae 7 
dent of Thompson-Starrett Com- Mr. Pavesich stated that ceilings| any cases the differences found 
jpany; Irving 8S. Olds, chairman of lof sales prices and rentals which |». + Ae A a oohn Sens iiienemen 
the board of the United States have to be established by FHA be- a inion of estimators or — 
Steel Corporation; Edwin A. Sal- fore the prospective builder can senieera which is frequent! wide 
mon, head of the City Planning ust : secure priority for the materials| P this market ” y 
Commission; Brig. Gen. John M. ie, om aeaiaiicietas 


lare substantially higher than the| 
Franklin, president of United 


linsured mortgage value of the) 
|States Lines,.and Seton Porter, ‘house eventually turns out to be.| 
head of the National Distillers Special to Tur New Yorx Tres 


Products Corporation. Haste Is Held Cause JERSEY CITY, N. J., April 30 
| The three officials who under-|—Horace K. Roberson of Bayonne, 
Groups Powers Are Wide took to answer this criticism to-| former Hudson County Common 
Although its decisions may be day agreed that such situations|/Pleas Court Judge, was sworn in 
|vetoed by the CPA, it- was empha- might result in a limited number/at the courthouse here today as 
jsized that the new committee's of cases but that they are inevit-| Hudson County Prosecutor, replac- 
powers were enormous because of able results of the haste required | ing Walter Van Riper, New Jersey 
the announced policy of permitting 


General Says Some Building' 
Under Preferential Priority 
Is Not Going to Veterans 





An eight-man committee with 
wide powers over post-war con- 
struction in New York City was 
named yesterday by Ralph Parker, 
regional director of the Civilian 
Production Administration, after 
approval in Washington. 

Under the terms of the Federal 
Government's construction restric- 
tions issued March 26, the group, 
which includes Robert Moses, city 
construction coordinator, will ap- 
|prove or reject applications for all 
non-housing projects in the five 


CLARK:GIBBY 


(Mr. Werth) 


COME and GET ‘EM 
New Tires 


WE HAVE THEM 


sk Se F aes ‘ 


: ' 
rk ok Ne BP abso 


A 70-year-old horsecar, a veteran of the Fifty-ninth Street crosstown route, in contrast with one of 
the modern Pan American Airways trans-Atlantic liners at La Guardia Field where the past and the present | 


in transportation teamed up yesterday in the campaign to raise funds for the drive. 


Roberson Takes Office 


—Men'S WEAR by 


BROWNING | 
| KIN —all fur felt } | 


720 


and more 


| WITHDRAWS GOILTY PLEA |tery ‘baakruptoy petition oud 20- 
STATE OFFICIAL DUE arr Lawyer Wants Jury|Robert A. inch mae tga 

BRAND NEW « FIRST 
QUALITY + FIRST LINE 


Attorney General, who has been 


and set June 5 as the date for trial. t. get the program under way. The! 
for fifteen 


n Fraud Charge 
to Pass o ° The defendant had been sched-|\statement potnted out that prior-|Acting Prosecutor 


ALWAYS A BARGAIN 
USED 
OFFICE FURNITURE 

IMMEDIATE DELIVERY 
Steel Letter & Legal Size Files, 
Lockers (all sizes), Storage 
Cabinets, Safes, Safe-Cabi- 
nets, Used Kardexes. 


UNITED 
OFFICE FURNITURE GO. 
580 B'way (Nr, Houston St.) 
WO 4-6768 


llocalities to assume leadership. in 
determining “essentiality” of com- 
mercial and industria] construction 
as compared with the need for 
erecting veterang housing. 

The March 26 order, issued by 
ithe CPA at the behest of Wilson 
|Wyatt, the President’s housing ex- 
|pediter, was designed to channel 
building materials into the con- 
struction of homes for returned 
service men and was put out in 
jsuch drastic terms that Mayor 
O'Dwyer asked both Mr. Wyatt and 
|John D. Small, head of the CPA, 
jto come to New York on April 5 
land give assurances that not all 
non-housing projects would be 


\new committee was regarded as 
especially impcrtant, since he is 
also a member of the Mayor’s com- 
mittee, appointed April 5, to in- 


EV ENIN G terpret the new restrictions and 


COURSES 


Only $5 


(unless otherwise noted ) 


TERM BEGINS MAY 5. 
ENDS JUNE 20. 
REGISTER IMMEDIATELY! 


These excellent adult courses will heip rn get 
more out cf life, broaden r hips and 

lify you for mew wocationa: 0; tunities 
Inleas otherwise noted, the a Be te £5 
for the firat and $8 ¢ - 
tional evb sect 


SPANISH: FRENCH: RUSSIAN: 
ITALIAN: PORTUGUESE: GERMAN: 


Elementary. intermediate, Advanced, ton. 
Conversation it stressed. Only a minimum of gram- 
me Gays and 


te given. Classes meet on various 
hours. of Advanced classes limited te six, $10. 
-. in 


ENGLISH: foreigners. $8.06 wal ngtien, 
$5.00. Developing Your . b 
PSYCHOLOGY: [ics*vprisi cay Bauhoicey, 
SS. Freed, 85. Aptitude Testing, $16. 
STOCK MARKET: Sverstion trading: see 


nomic analysis, inter- 
pretation, trends, $15 
Starting. finane- 


YOUR OWN BUSINESS: [cr 


afl phases of business are fully treated. $25. 


SALESMANSHIP: "sr KS "S: 
letorestiog profession, ineluding retail, 


and specialty selling, $10. 


ADVERTISING: Retultte! covy, writing. $s. 


Production (field 
$19. Ady. Layout, $15. 


Acting. $5. @ . §5. Dramatic 
DRAMA: w $15. (fesite Pertermaness). | 


Radic and Television Acting. 
Tues. 


PUBLIC SPEAKING: [s"., 
Sun. 85. Riythmic reading, $5.00. 


RADIO: Seript Writing, $16. Radic Announc- 
ing. 615. Radice Acting, $15. Tete- 
vision Acting and Makeup, $20. 


JOURWALISM: Siry, sic Pubively. sve 
ART: Elementary and Advanced Drawing and 

Painting, Still Life and Life, $10. Com- 
mercial, $15. Lettering, $15. 
INTERIOR DECORATION: [5° rersrne! 
¢ ee, $5. Advanced tat. Dee, $15. Practical 

se in Window Display, $15. 
A thereugh and embras- 

PHOTOGRAPHY: 4,,‘ecous* 2m 


DANCING: Mss, Serie! Dancing. Seote- 


BOOKKEEPING: An intonsive course ta the 


fundamentals, $15.00. 
mercial Arithmetic, $5 


A study of the documents. 
EXPORT: rules and oe a off 
routine 
ment 


\ 
levelved in expert and import, $10. Deew- 
preperation. $10. Expert Prometion, $10. 


Pitman of Grees. 


STENOGRAPHY: [i\wer | Gress. som. 
Mon. Tues. and Thurs.. $10 for 4 weeks. 
(Day studenta may earn tuition) 


TYPING: ~-,8 ~ Thereday, $10 for 4 


oo tu... 
° Wee - 


These immensely 
Glasses fill rapidly. Register N ; 


ABBE INSTITUTE 


Adult Education Since 1934 
369T Broadway, cor. 534 St. 
Chartered as @ non-profit educational corpora- 
tion §=Sponsored by public- persone in- 
terested in adult education 


Grab Those 40 Winks on the 
NEW 


“Leisurest”’ 


ish tor| Duildings must 


Con: | 


make recommendations to the 
Parker committee. He thus finds 
himself in the role of being a mem- 
ber of a group that will on 
recommendations he helps make. 

In addition to the many com- 
mercial buildings planned by pri- 
vate enterprise, the new com- 
mittee will consider the essential- 
ity of items in the Mayor's capital 
outlay program, due to be an- 
nounced June 1. Mr. Moses has 
| said he did not believe this pro- 
|gram would be adversely affected 
| by CPA restrictions. 


| Many Tenant Protests 


Another problem to come before 
the committee will be the projects 
planned on sites where present 
be demolished. 
| There have been steady protests 
by tenants in some multiple dwell- 
ings and hotels, as well as certain 
office buildings, that their already 
existing quarters are more essen- 
tial than planned construction. 

The Office of Price Administra- 
tion has put into effect a ruling 
that no certificates for eviction 





wheiessie| Will be granted to anyone seeking 


i- demolish a house and replace it 
| with another building, unless con- 
struction approval is first ob- 
| tained from the CPA; 

| The first meeting of the new 
committee will be held tomorrow, 
| although it was learned that a list 
| of approved projects would be an- 


|probably will be the last list of) 
approvals issued by the CPA with-| 
out consultation with the com- 
|mittee. A non-committee member, | 
|W. A. Riehl, New York district! 
manager of the CPA, will preside 
at its meetings. A second com- 
mittee, to handle applications from 
Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Put- 
nam, Rockland, Orange and Sulli- 
van Counties, will be named in the 
future, it was announced. 

Mr. Parker expressed his thanks 
yesterday to the new committee 
members for their acceptance of 





;| responsibilities “so essential to the 


success of the Government's hous- 
ing program.” 

| “The existence of this com-| 
mittee,” he declared, “is a guaran- 
tee that decisions invol the 
commerce and industry of metro- 
politan New York will be made 
with the advice and cooperation of 


special needs.” 
BOY YELLS ‘LIAR!’ AT TRIAL 


| Defendant, 16, in Murder Case 
| Shouts at a Witness 


The attitude of indifference with 


nounced today by the CPA. This| 


FOR QUIZ ON KLAN’ 


Demarest Revealed as One of 
the Incorporators of ‘Frat’ 
Forerunner of Ku Klux 


The Horace A. Demarest named 
by Attorney General Nathaniel L. 
Goldstein on Monday as one of the 
incorporators of a forerunner of 
the Ku Klux Klan in this State in 
1923 was revealed yesterday to be 
the Deputy State Motor Vehicle 
Commissioner in charge of Queens 
and a Republican leader in that 


At fis home, 37-56 Eighty-fifth 
Street, Jackson Heights, Queens, 
Mr. Demarest admitted had 


Klux Klan. 

Mr. Demarest insisted he knew 
nothing of the nature of the fra- 
ternity and never had any personal 
connection with the Klan. In those 
days, he said, he was an investiga- 
tor for a law firm and was slightly 


ma incorporation papers. 

“I was out of a job one day 
when I met this fellow Noah,” 
Commissioner Demarest explained. 
“He said to me, ‘You're a young 


fraternity I am o ’ 
you have to do is here. 

never saw Noah again I didn’t 
give the matter another thought.” 

“Are you sympathetic to the 
Klan in any way?” he was asked. 

“Are you kidding?” he replied. 
“Buch a question! I never had 
anything to do with the Klan or 
anything like it.” ° 

Commissioner Demarest wil! be 
questioned today by John Powers, 
First Assistant Attorney General. 
Mr. Powers understood that the 
“few dollars” paid Demarest for 
signing the papers were $100. If 
Mr. arest is not now con- 
nected with the Ku Klux Klan, he 
will not be made a defendant in 
the Attorney General's court ac- 
tion to. revoke the charter, Mr. 
Powers made clear. 

Mr. Powers is mainly interested 
in seeking from Commissioner 
Demarest information that may 
ead to present officers of the Klan, 
he said. The Attorney General 
holds that operation of the Klan 
violates the Walker Anti-Klan 
law, which ig a misdemeanor, 
unishable by one to five years in 
ail. 

Mr. Goldstein said on Monday 
he had been investigating the Klan 
since March 18 but his detectives 
had been unable to find any of the 
incorporators or lawyers named in 
either the Alpha Pi Sigma or Klan 
charter applications. Commissioner 
Demarest was found by reporters 
yesterday after his name ap 
in newspapers, and he readily con- 
ceded the validity of his signature. 


00. 5-883) men who know the city and its Mr. Demarest moved from Man- 


hattan to Queens in 1926. He has 
been active in Republican politics 
for sixteen years, running unsuc- 
cessfully for the State Senate in 
1930 and for Representative in 


1932. He was said to have organ-| § 


ized in Queens the first Willkie 
club in the State preceding the 
1940 Presidential campaign, The 


Miss Honour B. Gelson of 875|uled to be sentenced yesterday fol-|ity applications for more than 300,-| months. He was sworn in by Coun- 
|000 family units have been investi-;ty Common Pleas Court Judge 


ated by FHA since January 15. | August Ziegener. 


East Thirty-fifth Street, Brooklyn,|lowing her guilty plea on April 18.| 
a former assistant corporation| However, when her case was called, |® 
counsel and a disbarred lawyer,|her lawyer asked the court’s per-| 
withdrew her plea of guilty yester-| mission to change his client's plea.| 


Mr. Foley has repeatedly warned, 
it was said, that the system: of 


the charge of falsifying her volun- $1,000 bail. 


adventure 
a woman 


ever had 


quick appraisal by FHA, without|—radio, Diesel engines, refrigera- 


day in Federal Court, Brooklyn, to|Miss Gelson was continued in/inspection of the details, plans and tion, with the Marine Corps. Apply 
specifications. or visiting the site, 383 Madison 


All populer sizes available new for 
IMMEDIATE SALE 


Phone TRefaiger 7-6559 


TRAFALGAR TIRE CO. 


ee oe ae ee es 


Single men 17-26, learn a trade 


Ave. 


‘ 


a 


Mags 


if] 
~ {le 
Me, 


Weg 


f 


MAROONED WITH A MAN for four long years on a bleak little 
island! Together they struggled to keep alive—and shared 


their aching homesickness for far-off England. Yet when Nona 
Ranskill finally did get home again, she found herself a stranger 


in her own land. Because of the nature of this remarkable 
full-length novel, it will be published in three long 
parts—an innovation in POST fiction. Don’t 


wo 


_— > miss the first part in today’s issue. 
“Sra g L 


A FULL-LENGTH NOVEL 
[in three parts | 
MISS RANSKILL COMES HOME 
by Barbara Bower 


ANNEX 
SQUARE 


are wearing dan- 
vast ex- 


filled 


WE SHOULD 


Our land resources 


gerously thin. Yet theres ® 


Also in this issue... 


The Bombardier Who Would Build Cities by Richard 
Tregaskis . . . Meet Me at the Altar—a rollicking 
romance by Frederic Sinclair . . . The Feather 
Merchants of Pine Bluff—Arthur W. Baum re- 
ports on the bow-and- 
arrow boom .. . plus 


fe’ herve 
f still richer terri , 
ag d valuable minerals, teem 


i j in the 
i d animal life—in 
‘ae with plant anc ® sted 
fo Ifwe don’t claum our share 
ewpte become 4 second- 


which 16-year-old Nicholas Trin-|following year he opposed Fiorello 
|chillo has listened to prosecution|H, La Guardia as the Republican 
|witnesses in his second-degree|candidate for Mayor, as he had in 
murder trial in Kings County/1933. He was ted Deputy 
|Court, Brooklyn, was discarded|State Motor Vehicle Commissioner 
| briefly yesterday when the youth/after Governor Dewey took over 


many other interesting 
articles, stories, serials 
and eritertaining spe- 
cial features, including 


MILES OF OCEAN 


by Harold F. Clark and 
George T- Renner 


4 
4 
‘ 


Ideal for Home 
or Office 


Tous: of hand edjuste headrest to 5& 
adjustable positions No herd eprings, 
cushioned with heir for extra softness! 


Covered With a Plastic 


it W. 32nd: St, 0. YY. PE 6-0588 


All Types of Office Furniture Available 


.|the State charges he beat 


Lockers 
Sheiving 


Cabinets 
LOW PRICES 


anywhere 
NK: 74 Broad St. 
e K c. BO. 8-8884 


New & Used Office Furnitere. f 


| 


| took exception to the testimony of 
a detective. 

“You're a liar,” the defendant 
shouted as Detective Nathan Sha- 
piro of the Classon Avenue Pre- 
cinct told of taking Trinchillo to a 
vacant lot at Bedford Avenue and 
Kosciusko Street, Brooklyn, where 
the boy showed him where he found 
the 15-inch iron pipe with which 
Mrs. 
Pauline Goldfire, 53, at her store, 
567 Myrtle Avenue, Brooklyn, on 
last Oct. 27. The woman died lat- 
er in Cumberland Hospital. 

Nathaniel Kramer, attorney for 
the defense, calmed his client and 
the detective continued, saying the 
boy “showed us how he tip-toed 
behind the woman and, as e 
reached the kitchen, he took the 
pipe from the sleeve of his jacket 
and struck her over the head.” 


ADVERTISEMENT 


Acid Indigestion 


Relieved in & minutes or | 
double your money back. | 
When exeess stomach acid causes ful suffo-| 
ost and | 
usus! fastest ecting medici 
known for ammptomatie gr = itke 
in Bell ans Tablets. No laxative. I- 


'eomfort in « jiffy or double your money ce 
return of bottle to ua S50 af all druggifts. 


the State administration. 


Life Savings Go to Cancer Fund 

LOS ANGELES, April 30 U»— 
Dr. Albert Soiland, who gave fifty 
of his seventy-three years to the 
study 


over his lifetime earnings for a 
cancer foundation which will bear 
his name. The Soiland Foundation, 
with asgets of $1,000,000, imme- 
diately will endow fellowships for 
promising young physicians in 
cancer research in leading medical 
schools. Announcement of Dr. 
Soiland’s gift came shortly after 
his departure by ship for his na- 
tive Norway for a visit. Half the 

was loaded with food and 
clothing that he personally solic- 
ited and collec here for the 


hungry of Norway. 


AN APPEAL - 


Twe veterans with new bookbind- 
mphiet and 


sass 


we may someday 
or third-rate power 


f the nation’s top 
of. this 

i the real cause a 
A fascinating. he! pful article. 


a MAKE YOU SICK? 
M. Spencer 


Is it laziness? Love? No! One © 


psychologists has f 


THE WEATHE 
DoE by Steven 


DON’T MISS IT! 


Something new in POST 
Covers— Doris Lee's exuber- 
ant and imaginative paint- 
ing of a Maypole dance 


There’s exciting reading for everyone in the, Post 


The Tasmanian Wolf 
by Will Cuppy. 


GOING ON A TRIP? No matter how or where you 
plan to go, places to visit and ways to get there 
are described in the advertising pages of the Post. 
Millions of Americans look to the Post first for 
new services and products. 


ON THE AIR: “The Listening Post” every Tuesday, 
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday morning at 10:45 on WJZ. 


* EVENING 
THE SATURDAY EVENIN 


ost 


MAY 4 . 4G