LATE CITY EDITION 


Sunny and somewhat warmer 


day with moderate to fresh winds 


Temperatures Yesterday—Max., 59; Ma. 47 
1 AM 


“All the News 
That’s Fit to Print’ 


Sunrise, Sunset 


The New York Gime 


Copyright, 1944, by The New York Times Company. 


~NEW YORK, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


ss — ane pe THREE CENTS wew roax cere 


Entered as Second-Class Matter, 
Postoffice, New York, N. Y. 


VOL. XCIV.No. 31,693. waaranner, Cuarseant 





MES 


10 0 ee 
ee ee Peet 
| SCALE OF MILES 


‘Control of Aprraaches 


BOTH EXTOL ROOSEVELT! 


~- .* 


A\\ xe Rotterdam 
— * NETHERLANDS,,-"* 


N 
s 


that the Wagner Charges Republicans 
informed ev 


ae 
Have Tolerated ‘an Appeal cae to Big Belgian ™ 
| to Religious Prejudice’ ‘Cun . ae Assured to Allies 


| — 
f *4 ‘ 


‘REAR GUARDS ARE VICIOUS 


C 
_ 


In Buffalo Address Governor 
Says Opponent and Party 
Adopt ‘Me Too’ Tactics 


GIVES OWNPROGRAM sss: AT UBERAL RALLY HINA RIFT 
| 

Republican Nominee Promises  !east 3,000 additional medical of- ROOSE EL T DISC UNTS C I I 

ficers, Paul V. McNutt, chair- oa . 
FOR SMALL BUSINESS AID) ica. or neaicine, said. “but as 

(\ WNeaer 
him that recruiting of civilian 
physicians for the Army had 


sonnel expansion and intensifica- 
They Enter Garden Arm in Arm, 
Jobs, High Wages, Profits | man of the War Manpower Com- 
would ease the emergency that 
| been discontinued. 


‘ittinhagaltaton : | Sse weld Ny , co > Wier snesots 0 anaee —_— 
DEWEY RIDICULES $40¢ Doctors | WALLACE, TRIMAN ALLIES WIN BATTLE FOR ANTWERP; 
| man of the | but Vice President Fails to 
and Lower Taxes Bente so | Return Nominee’s Praise BATTLE FOR BIG ALLIED SUPPLY PORT IS VIRTUALLY AT AN END _ 
COLDSTEIN PRESSES 
“POLL FRAUD INQUIRY 


: Sought by Navy | 
ROOSEVELT PLEDGE CHREREDEY 20000 PP PITISH DRIVE TO BANK OF MEUSE: 
actual needs,” Vice Admiral Ross SU 


OVERFLAKKEE TS 


| — 


Excerpts of addresses at the 
Garden rally appear on Page 16. 
| 


The text of Governor Dewey’s 
18. 


address is on Page 
Foe in South Schelde Pocket 
and on Walcheren Hopeless 

/ we ‘ y —Liesel Re-entered 
/BELGIUM” A\U"™* 2. Po : 


ZOE Antwerp if DREW 
alt | lt i 


With some Canadians at the outskirts of Sluis (1) pressing| beyond to establish a bridgehead across the Mark River. Another! 31—Infantry of the Britis 
he east, where the British were four| Army have smashed through 


ortnwest 


By FRANK 8. ADAMS 

Coming down the center aisle 
of Madison Square Garden arm in} 
jarm, to the cheers of a crowd of 
20,000 persons, Senator Harry S. 
Truman, Democrat nominee for the 
Vice Presidency, and Vice Presi-| 
dent Henry A. Wallace made their| 
aad atteed. 06 on Giternative, the first and probably their only joint | 
J jappearance of the Presidential 

domestic program which he out- Figures made public yesterday |campai ' 
lined in broad strokes, rather than), 7 ‘ ee paign at a mass meeting last 

by Dr. John E. Wade, Superin- night of the Liberal party. 


By WARREN MOSCOW 
Special to Taz New York Times 
BUFFALO, Oct. 31—Governor 
Dewey, opening tonight the last 
swing of his Pres ‘dential campaign 
at the Memorial Auditorium 
here, ridiculed the promise of 
peacetime prosperity made Satur- 
day night by President Roosevelt 


But Dr. Wade Reveals Ratio of 
Failures in Literacy Tests 
Exceeded That in 1940 


tour 


By MIDDLETCN 


By ‘Vireiess t “2 
orl o Ss 


SUPREME HEADQUARTERS 
Nov. 1, 1944 | Allied Expeditionary F 2 





— 
ana 


7er 





Mr. 
of 


toward the river 


All crossings of the M 


in detail, earlier in the campaign. |i ondent of Schools, showed that a . 4 , 
: s yd ¥ ri . was set up tot 
Taking up Mr. Roosevelt's pledge}, ._ a . They vied with one another in|the Germans into a narrow pocket and others charging across the bridgehead | up Other British By db rtrd io 
000 ti ‘ob the| usher proportion of those taking) protestations of their loyalty to; causeway to Walcheren Island (2), where enemy guns at Flushing} miles below Moerdijk (5). Other British units too aamsd |man rear guards : 
ee ee yess: = iP t| literacy tests this year to qualify| president Roosevelt and in heap-| have already fallen silent, the Schelde estuary leading to Antwerp| and advanced to within half a mile of the Geertruidenberg Bridge burg and fought their wa 
Republican nominee for resi en |as voters were failed than ih 1940, ing scorn on Governor Dewey and|is under Allied control. Eastward the Allies drove the foe back|and swept through Capelle to the bank of the Meuse (6). To the) southern bank of the Meuse 
bluntly called that promise worth-' the last Presidential election year. | senator Gruman. ter nie vert went | #gainst the Meuse. Canadians moved close to Steenbergen (3)./ east British and American troops had smothered the German | River, while to the east 
less, even though it is repeated At the same time every available ada ét Cialindie the tox ‘a things | “mericans captured Oudenbosch (4) and smashed three miles! offensive threat and were battling inside Liesel and Meijel (7)./o¢ this spearhead Britis! 
again, and again, and again. employe in the local office of the| spout the meni whom he hopes to! = —== ————— ee —— — we | dian, American and Poli 
Throughout -_ greeters] State Attorney General W&S| succeed. He interjected into his| > e ° j lare rolling the beater 
Dewey, es > geen npreuprar ~ | pressed into service to complete an prepared speech ‘the statement RRM) ARMY CM ASHES Stilwell-Chiang Differences JAPAN'S AIR LOSSES 
ve Cues: ppecrayty _— 4881 inquiry into charges that there | that Mr. Waliace was “the great-| h 
ce sepa ate Ht was first! had been widespread frauds this|est secretary of Agriculture this, WwW | P l R It S ison. ‘The Germans any 
used by Mr. Roosevelt in October,| . sar in connection with the is-|countey ais Gini ersona 9 ooseve ays lfire. The Germans may be 
1940, in an address at Boston in|° ; ee “ , , leet their forces across 
|... |Suance of such certificates. | But Vice President Wallace LE : MS sida Pe = g f 
ee he _2 Fp age gene William B. Herlands, special @8-| pointedly avoided any equally oe coiled a jover the great Moerdijk Br 
f r¢ © Ser aproac , ’ : ’ e 2 he Ceertruidenbe 
0 rai = diieeenn edb sistant attorney general in charge! plimentary reference to the man | but th 
‘ of the investigation, declined tO|whom the Democratic National New Drive Is 44 Miles From | 
An Eight-Point Program make any comments yesterday On/Convention preferred to himself. : ‘ : | 
Mr. Dewey’s own program was| is progress to date and referred| tig speech, as originally released Hungarian Capital—Pincers 
an eight-point one, headed by a/@!! Pape pont airy A. re to the press yesterday afternoon,| gn East Prussia Reported 
statement that he would furnish|S¢cretary to Attorney ‘senerat ™@-| contained the assertion that 
full employment, through full pro- | thaniel L. Goldstein. wencapd Ellis) «neither is Truman a reactionary | . 
duction, at high wages, with prof-| hinted that the fraud mary Might | Democrat,” but it contained no af-| 
its for business, too. After that he|¢ bigger, not smaller,” but could) ripmative praise for his successful | 
|not say when there would be any) pjyaj). Rus b 
sian troops, smashing toward 


pledged the lowering of taxes for! 
CRREVOORY, TD MAING Of Social | furiner raga is At the meeting last night press Budapest in a renewed offensive 
attachés of the Liberal party dis- in which more than 200 Hungarian 


the west, 


Nimitz Puts Two-Month Toll) Brifse to the cast is vs 


closed as an escape 
has been under fire since 
morning and its 


probably now in 


approaches 
Allied hand 
— for the port 


~ 


Ry The United Press 
LONDON, Wednesday, Nov. 1- 


se ‘ 


A sao 
Lond mn 


reported 


unoffi- 





German Positions Collapse 


tive. 
ered more fully 
dresses. 

The two new points in his pro- 
gram for domestic prosperity were | 
the pledge of a survey which would} 
lead to the abolition of most of the 
reports that business men now 
have to turn in to the Government, 
and the setting up of a “competent | 
staff of prosecutors in the Depart- 
so that “we can 





south ~¢ 
— 
capt 


Sharp Denials Issued | 


American Labor 
Churchill's. 





The text of Mr. 


speech is on Page 8. 
importance 

By JOHN MacCORMAC Raa wh 

By Wireless to Tue New York Times. & 

LONDON, Oct. 31—Prime Min- 

ister Churchill told Parliament to- 

day that it seemed difficult to be- 


lieve that the war against Ger- 


and overru! 


ment of Justice,” 
bring an end to business monopoly! 


oe reagerid inatene Of Gust aaal ing to frighten naturalized citizens 
ing about it. | 


roti f the first . ti 
Just as Mr. Roosevelt and other Oe. ee ae z ey See 


if the polls. 
Democratic spokesmen had accused | rs Seater Cheats dest eae 
Mr. Dewey of saying “‘me too,” the aS 


: b lit iv i 
Republican nominee flung it back se sa page wen hae 6 
at them and declared that they|- e made pudiic 


a ier ee tua” om tie etehinn at his offices in Brooklyn. They 
pind gta Seed ; ow showed that 199,586 persons took 
to help small business. 


To prove that small business had | 069 eS patna 
suffered under the New Deal, Mr. aa : in 


War News Summarized 


NOVEMBER 1, 1944 


WEDNESDAY, iz 
with Zuid Beveland, whic! 





By BERTRAM D. HULEN 
Special to Tas New Yorx Times. 
‘his news conference today published reports that Gen. Joseph W.| Taken by Carriers Alone at 
| Stilwell had been relieved of his command in China, Burma and 2,594—18 More Ships Sunk 
iIndia in response to a demand from Generalissimo Chiang Kai- 
shek. Without mentioning spe- cE Be PPR hae SS Ge B cs poy y pact 
see 7 A in our 
cifically the detailed report con- j By GEORGE HORNE Breen Brea got 
By Telephone to Tar New York Times | declared a spokesman ! ‘ 
: - Gen. Sir Miles C. Demp 
published this morning in THE unk dake thik te the Desitte ws! 
: . . ORK 1 by Brooks e firs me in the Pacific war} ade be 
Security benefits available to all,| it was Mr. Herlands interim Hore ; mn ya Ae cbr fleet carrier aircraft are destroy-| Army. “It is a question , 
the setting of a “floor” under farm reports = “re he found tn = tributed through the press sectiod towns and villages were . seized, end ‘ pai 2 ps ing enemy fighting planes faster| = how oo back he Ger na 
prices and the “restoration” of col-|'mquiry into the issuance of cer- typewritten slips announcing that) yesterday drove to within forty- responcent, WwW: o has just re Se MN: ATS. than Japan can build them. pe ~ ce n ated 
Mr. Wallace would insert after thi8|roy, miles southeast of the Hun- turned to this country, the Pres- It has been. estimated dispat« rom 
between Congress and the Execu-| Prompted Mr. Goldstein to order a the statement. } 
these sx points he had cov. |full inquiry ~ rgb ore esi record of Truman shows that he/streets of Kecskemet, Hungary’s|his office that they already no more than 1,500 planes a month 
in previous ad-| Of the preliminary rep o M4yOrlis a genuine internationalist and/¢oyrth city. knew the facts from published May Last 18 Months More, and that not all are fighting craft,| y; seems probable tonic 
La Guardia, Police Commissioner|, consistent supporter of liberal . P he : 2 probabil - 
|Lewis J. Valentine and Dr. Wade. ‘ Agr PP Soviet tanks and infantry raced reports. It was just a case of He Says, Winning Extension for a certain percentage of produc-/ more than a third of the 40.00 
domestic policies.” In his actual! .. the Hungarian plains on a| personalities, he declared. tion goes into trainers, transports| German effectives 
delivery, however, Mr. Wallace curving seventy-five-mile front be-| Mr. Roosevelt also confirmed the a and other categories. | river will be killed 
{party and the Teachers Union, | 8¢rtion. as Berlin reported that the Red/has been American Ambassador to \while making no reference to the! jjed line reaches the rive 
|both of which had been mentioned; Wallace Opposes Reactionaries | Army had launched a third great/China since February, 1941, was enemy's production, announced to-| positions on the Mark R 
in Mr. Herlands’ interim report as| Considerable had | offensive within four days, opening |resigning. He had been so informed day a striking computation on en-/the Mark Tindel Cana 
abetting fraudulent practices, is-|been attached to the joint appear-|a powerful drive toward East |on Sunday by the State Depart- | emy air losses in the last twWO|ken today. 
|sued caustic denials yesterday injance of the two men by campaign Prussia from the south. lment, he added. A veteran diplo- months, including only those de-| were smashed 
an” the Attorney General of seek-|would eliminate the last trace of/had struck toward Fast Prussiajice in 1907, Mr. Gauss has long ‘by aircraft from the carriers. (Cologne, ahead of the 
resentment among Mr. Wallace’s|and toward Danzig from along the|wanted to resign, according to Mr. Since Aug. 30, he said, Repeal ‘ean Firat. Army front 
admirers over the way he was dis-/|“entire’ Narew River front in Po-|Roosevelt. There was no connec- coniins dais Eipici hited, Conia planes have been shot down in the tacked gain Tuesday eve 
carded at the Democratic conven- Bi fighting raged north/tion between the resignation and ° air and 1,132 were destroyed on the ’ = sbers and Mos: 
land. Bitter fighting rag mas or even Easter, that he be- British heavy bombers and Mos 
tion. Mr. Wallace himself took|and south of Pultusk, thirty miles/the recall of General Stilwell, he ‘ ground, a grand total of 2,594. In 
‘tain’ iti “ Saturday have hit the Rhineland 
some of them might not support|admitted that Soviet forces had| General Stilwell, in the circum- i ee ae es ee listed as probably destroyed or) ,,i) center with more than 10.000 
the party ticket, saying: broken into German lines at two/stances, was recalled with the full or banat 9 a Se aarp damaged | tons of bombs in the Allied plan 
“Some people tell me that here pineal nerenrcenny avn : . ’ niashiieiieiian stata 
aa a ti can find someone| Co@tinued on Page 15, Column 5 ' Continued on Page 4, Column? [general election for seven to nine Our Losses 300 Planes | * destroy the center's usefulness 
sulking jn tite tent because he months from now. Our own losses for the two-! to the Germans. } 
sei I0En bed dedintel that io tests, of whom 12,241, or 7.2 per|ary Democrat has done. Well, prudent to assume that Japan/approximately 300 carrier planes, Antwerp is = ~~ final st 
those aaa 500.000 small busi cent, failed. neither Truman nor Roosevelt is could be beaten in less than eight-| making the ratio higher than 8 to| There is heavy gating for t 
P Oe | Dr. Wade said he did not know|g reactionary Democrat. Moreover, een months after Germany's col-}1, Our personnel losses, the ad-|Proaches to Walcheren 
nesses had closed their doors.) | : : } ¢ : : l he felt it would be wrong t iral’ iqué id rere| across the causeway conne 
Wiksthér @ wan Because ths own- | nen he would have a report of|] say to you that if any reaction- apse, he ong to;miral’s communiqué said, were 
ers were inducted into the army jhis own inquiry into the situation 
or because of shortages of retail) —. - 
materials, or for o> ce tabi Mr jsaid the Board of Education was 
Demet did spac *”~"leooperating with Mr. Goldstein's 
He did, however, take another ere r ; 
Democratic issue, first raised} bout ten days ago, Dr. Wade 
|said, his. office reported alleged| 
when it appeared possible that Mr. | : a 7 
Coolidge might run again, eo. School 90, 225 hepa 147th} 
flung it in the face of the Demo- | Street, we caiipgpevemectin sites 2% 
crats, in this up-State address, a cial assistant attorney general 
speech, which than any |#*Ked at that time, the school offi- 
~ |cial added, that no action be taken 


WASHDTVGTON, Oct. 31—President Roosevelt confirmed at 
,cerning the dismissal that was 
PEARL HARBOR, Oct. 31—For 
mander of the British 
lective bargaining and cooperation|ficates at some schools that 
phrase a sentence reading: “The| garian capital and broke into the ident told newsmen crowded into End Likely by Easter. Japan cially that the enemy production is 
Officiais of the failed to make the promised in-| +465 the Danube and Tisza Rivers|report that Clarence EB. Gauss, who Admiral Chester W. Nimitz,| wounded by the time the 
. a | 
which they accused Mr. Herlands| strategists, who hoped that it! The enemy said the Red Army|mat who entered the foreign serv- stroyed on the ground or shot down | one end of the front to th: 
‘ Ayes ; 7 dis- quito planes. Eight blows since 
cognizance of the possibility that|north of Warsaw, Berlin said, and/added. Meved it would: be unwise to dis addition to these, 252 planes — 
ie P : : » were| The battle for the approaches to 
Dewey took the war years 1942 four years ago 169,269 took the| doesn’t like something a reaction- However, since it would not be|month period ending today were PF . , 
jready for Mayor La Guardia. He| 
against Calvin Coolidge in 1927,|". , 
iviolations of literacy test rules at 
other, seemed aimed to round up, 


more 





and to answer, all the Democratic! Continued on Page 17, Column 6 
arguments. : — 


Two-Term Limit Urged 


Mr. Dewey did this by coming 
out for a Constitutional amend- 
ment which would limit future 
Presidents to two terms in office, 
on the ground that “four terms, 
or sixteen years, is the most dan-} 
gerous threat to our freedom ever | 
proposed.” Senator La Follette) 
was sponsor of a resolution, in 
1927, declaring it to be “the sens€|gram today, an address to be 
of the Senate” to be opposec to| broadcast from the Whtte House 
more than two terms, and the|on Thursday night, but he plans no 
resolution was adopted with the! 
aid of Democratic votes and keep his last major speaking en- 
apaaenes. Mr. Dewey dealt with it) pagement of the campaign in Bos- 
only briefly tonight. ‘ton on Saturday night. 
Governor Dewey began his ad-| 





|which filled all but a few seats of 


|hundreds of standees in other sec-| 


The end of German resistance 
south of the Meuse drew closer 
as a British spearhead in the 
Netherlands reached the river 
northwest of Tilburg and other 
Allied troops rolled the entire 
enemy line back. All crossings 
of the Meuse were under artillery 
fire and German casualties were 
expected to be heavy. The last 
remaining guns on flooded Wal- 
cheren Island were almost within 
grasp of the Allies. A sapokea- 


ary Democrat has offended you he 
has probably offended me a thou- 
sand times as much. But I want 
to say to you that I am out work- 
ing with all brands of Democrats 
who are in favor of Roosevelt.” 

It was noticeable that the crowd, , 


the big amphitheatre behind the 


speakers’ platform and _ included| 


tions, warmly applauded = and} 
cheered Senator Truman, but that} 


Continued on Page 16, Column 1 | 





Roosevelt Adis Cignmiien Soeack | 
To Be Broadcast Tomorrow Night’ 


| 


By C. P. TRUSSELL 


Specia) to Tae New Yorx Times. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—Presi-| vent 
|dent Roosevelt added another po-|States in addition to his White 
litical speech to his campaign pro-| House work. 


speaking trips into both 


The President asked the advisers 


to choose between the States, Mr. 
Carly said, and reported that their 
more traveling until he leaves to} ynanimous decision 
chusetts. 
added, the advisers, encouraged by 
|his reception at New York, Phila- 
Thus, the long-projected trip to|delphia and Chicago, renewed their 


Massa- 
Early 


was 


However, Mr. 


dress with two pledges which, he/|Cjeveland, with possibly a jump pleas for a trip to Cleveland. 


said, had been prompted by Mr.|into Michigan, which political ad- 
Roosevelt's speeches in Philadel-|visers have been urging the Presi- 
phia and Chicago. |dent to make, appeared to be out 


The first of these, used by Mr.|of the picture. When these ad- 


Mr. Early made it clear today | 


ithat the President had held to his 
original decision as to trips away| 
from Washington, and at the same| 


Continued on Page 18, Column 1 | Visers first asked Mr. Roosevelt t0/time announced preliminary plans 


DEMOCRATS—REPUBLICANS—LABORITES— 
INDEPENDENTS 
If you agree IT IS TIME FOR A CHANGE 
siop im and register with the CITIZENS COM . 
MITTEF for DEWEY-BRICKER-CURRAN, 2083 day, the President said that the 
S : 


Montague St Bklyn., : . 
9 P. M.—Advt pressure of his duties would pre- 
co 





|Ohio, Stephen T. Early, 


near Court St., GA 


—|go into both Massachusetts and for the Thursday 


night speech. 


White! The hour of this broadcast will be | 
House secretary, revealed yester-| set later. 


The President devoted | 


Continued on Page 40, Column ? 


-* 


man for Gen. Dempsey said the 
battle for Antwerp had been 
won. American and British forces 
took back some of the points loat 
in the German counter-attack 
east of Eindhoven. [1:8.] 

Cologne was struck again yes- 
terday by two separate forces of 
British pianes, following the dev- 
astating assaults on Monday. 
[14:1.] England was subjected to 
its first daylight flying bomb as- 
sault in over a month. [6:1.] 

The Russians were within for- 
ty-four miles of Budapest in a 
new drive that captured more 
than 200, towns. The advance, 
by cutting in between Budapest 
and Szeged, threatened to trap 
a large German-Hungarian force. 
{1:4; map, P. 15.] 

Prince Humbert, Lieutenant 
General of the Realm, indicated 
at an audience that the Italian 
monarchy must follow the rest 
of Europe to the left. He spurned 
the support of fascist elements 
who thought they saw safety be- 
hind the throne. [1:6-7.] 

Carrier planes alone from the 
Third and Seventh Pacific Fleets 
have destroyed in the past two 


~ 


months 2,594 Japanese planes 
and damaged 252 more, Admiral 
Nimitz announced. This loss ex- 
ceeds Japan's replacement ca- 
pacity. About 300 American 
planes went down in the engage- 
ments, but many of the crews 
were saved. American subma- 
rines have sunk eighteen more 
Japanese ships. [1:7.] 

General MacArthur in an or- 
der of the day expressed his ap- 
preciation of the efforts of all 
arms in the Leyte campaign and 
of the assistance of the Filipinos. 
He promised to keep fighting 
“until Bataan and Corregidor 
once more rise to life.” Ameri- 
can troops continued to mop up 
on Leyte. {[3:1.] 

Three Japanese units in China 
were closing in on Kweilin; two 
were within six miles of that 
key city. [5:1.] President Roose- 
velt said the disagreement be- 
tween General Stilwell and Gen- 
eralissimo Chiang Kai-shek had 
been one of personalities, and 
confirmed the resignation of Am- 
bassador Gauss, [1:5-6.] Lin 
Tso-han, Communist leader in 
Shensi Province and former 
member of the Kuomintang, 
called for an end of one-party 
rule in China and for united ef- 
fort against the Japanese. [5:4.] 

Prime Minister Churchill, ask- 
ing prolongation of Parliament 
for another year, told the Com- 
mons that the war against 
Germany might continue into the 
summer and that the war 
against Japan probably would 
go on for a vear and a half after 
the defeat of Hitler. [1:6.] 


| prolong the life of the present Par-| ‘considerably less because of res- 
liament after the end of the warj|cue operations, which saved many} 
in Europe. lives.” It is not clear whether he! 
To allow the soldiers to vote and| meant less than 300 pilots and less 
to carry through a partial redis-| than 300 air crew men, or less than| 
tribution of constituencies, a period| 300 all together. 
of two to three months would; The high rate of destruction 
elapse between the time Parlia-| turned in by carrier planes is dra- 
ment was dissolved and the elec-| matic reassurance of the growing) 
tion. Between now and dissolution| superiority of American strength, | 
the position would not be easy for/not only in the air but in every 
the coalition since the odor of bat-| other fighting arm, for it is axi- 
tle would be in the air. To insure|omatic that air supremacy means) 





Continued on Page 8, Column 1 Continued on Page 5, Column 1 


Italian Miamitvelian Must Move Lett, | 
Crown Prince Humbert Declares 


By HERBERT L. MATTHEWS 

By Wireless to Tux New Yorx Times. 

ROME, Oct. 31—Monarchy, like| usually early hour of 8:30 A. M. 
all political institutions in post-|Prince Humbert speaks excellent! 
war Europe, should move to the/English. His complete lack of cere-| 
left, Crown Prince Humbert told 


mony, his sense of humor and his! 
me today in a private audience|fluent way of talking, which}! 
that lasted for an hour. 


showed that he knew what he 
The Lieutenant General of the| wanted to say on any given topic, | 
Realm, in a casual talk that|permitted a great deal of ground) 
ranged over every phase of inter-|to be covered in the hour. 
nal and foreign policy, spoke ~| Prince Humbert had just re- 
fully and frankly to give me an|turned from a two-day trip to the 
authoritative idea of the political! Cassino district. where found 
| Position of the Crown, which has/the conditions in some villages dis-| 
been so difficult to obtain because tressing. That was the most 
of the lack of news organs and/fought-over area of Italy and the 
prominent spokesmen. ‘destruction has not yet been great- 
My appointment was for the un-| ly repaired. In some villages the 
; _ | peasants had had no bread for five 
mu Ld 3 
Sy Hy te YF days. 
ers. experienced mechanics; post-war eoumesy. | n 
oon. og Re _—< Ratiteed ‘we. | “While your soldiers were there 
tirement Board, 341 @th Ave. or 58 Hudson St.. 
|N ¥ City Essentie! workers need statement : 
ot avellability -advt Cent's 


he 


("ere F 


finally been cleared of the enemy 
South of the Schelde estuar: 
German pocket in Belgium is s 

ly disintegrating under Canadia 
attacks that have broken into ¢ 


enemy quadrilateral west of F 


Continued on Page 14, Column 5 


Tokyo Area Raided, 
, . 
Japan’s Radio Says 

The a be 
caat 
Press in 
“several 
planes 
area” 
ican Superfortress 
Japanese capital—about 
today, Tokyo time 
midnight, Eastern war tin 

The brief Tokyo 
merely that the plane 
ately fled from our f 


Tokyo rad 
recorded b 
San Fra 
enemy 
came over 
an indicatir 


Ry The Ass clated P 


A B-29 BASE IN WESTEI 
CHINA, Oct. 31 
Japanese fighter planes 
up on a single American 
bomber over their home 
in the 
the Superfortresses, and not 
failed to so n 
but had 
planes shot dowr 
aged by the bomber’s 
interrogation 
toda, 


ese 


Seventy-nu 


recent Kyushu atta 
as scrat 
sever their 
and tw 


_ 
officers di 


WOR -Blection.minded” 
Reasie Rest? > 
—— : 


a 





NOVEMBER i, , 1944. 


ee 


_THE NEW, . YORK TIMES, WE /DNESDAY, 


NO 
SAUCY 


CAMOUFLAGE 
ON YOUR 


PLATE! 


Longchamps entrees rep- 
resent the finest in superb 
taste and quality. No 
“camouflage” is necessary 
»+.no need for pungent 
sauces to disguise 
inferior flavor! 


ENJOY 
TRUE FOOD TASTE 


The delectable sauces for 
which Longchamps is 
famed are pure, delicate 
and supremely SUBTLE. 
They “point up” rather 
than “cover up” TRUE 
FRESH FOOD flavor of 
Longchamps prime meats, 
seatood and garden- 
fresh vegetables. 


THERE ARE TWELVE 


RESTAURANTS 


Hohu Surrey 
PIPES 


HUNDREDS OF STYLES FROM 
WHICH TOCHOOSE. COMPLETE 
PRICE RANGE $1.00 TO $25.00 


CONVENIENTLY LOCATED 
STORES 


John Surrey, Ltd. 


509 STH AVE, 35 NASSAU ST 
At 42nd St. Cor. Liberty St 


100 E. 42 ST. 875 6TH AVE. 
Ion. Grand Central 


At Sist St 








qué: 


lied, 


United Nations 


SUPREME HEADQUARTERS 
Expeditionary Force, Oct. 
AP)—Communiqué 206: 

South [Zuid] Beveland is in 
ied hands. Early yesterday 
was taken and Satie our forces, 
pushing westward along the rail- 
way, 
to Walcheren. 
my had been driven from the coun- 
try north and south of the railway 
Gun emplacements, strong 
and ammunition dumps on the is- 
land of Walcheren were attacked 
by heavy and fighter-bombers. 

In the Schelde pocket Retranche- 
ment was freed. There was heavy 
fighting in the area of Sluis, where 
our troops have reached the out- 
skirts of the village. Fighters and 
fighter - bombers supported’ the 
ground forces west of Breskens 
and rocket-firing fighters hit forti- 
fied buildings and pillboxes at 
Knokke. 

In the Bergen op Zoom-Roosen- 
daal sector good gains were made 
in spite of enemy mines and booby 
traps. Our troops are within three 
miles of Steenbergen Roosendaal 
was taken, and we reached the 
area of Oud Gastel. There has been 
some progress northwest of Breda 
and we are across the whole of the 
road petween Bergen op Zoom and 
Breda Transportation targets in 
the Breda area and a road bridge 


Al- 


at Terheijden were hit by fighter, | 


bombers. 

Northwest of Tilburg our advance 
continued on a broad front. We 
have reached the outskirts of Oos- 
terhout, and farther east we are in 
the vicinity of Capelle. 

Farther east the enemy counter- 
attack in the Meijel area made no 
headway during the day. 

The synthetic oil plant at Wes- 
seling, near Cologne, was the tar- 
get for heavy bombers with fighter 
escort 

Maizieres-les-Metz 
cleared of the enemy. 

In other regions, from Aachen to 
Luneville, patrolling continued. 

Slight gains were made east of 
Rambervillers and the villages of 
Jeanmenil and Bru were freed. Ac- 
tivity from Luneville to the Swiss 
border otherwise consisted largely 
of patrolling. A number of counter- 
attacks were repulsed without dif- 
ficulty. 


has been 


— = 
ROME, Oct. 31 (AP)—A communi- 


Sea 

On Oct. 28 and 29 H.M.S. Aurora 
continued to bombard enemy bat- 
teries on the island of Melos. 

On the night of Oct. 27-28 Allied 
light coastal forces operating in 
the Gulf of Genoa successfully at- 
tacked an enemy convoy of six 
F-lighters with two escorts enter- 
ing Rapallo Harbor. Three of the 
lighters were sunk 

On Oct. 27 the United States de- 
stroyer Plunkett and the French 
cruiser Jeanne d’Arc obtained di- 


rect hits on enemy batteries on the 


Franco-Italian frontier. 

On Oct. 28 the United States de- 
stroyers Gleaves and Plunkett and 
the French cruiser Emile Bertin 
bombarded enemy batteries and 
troop concentrations in the same 
area. Direct hits were obtained 
and the whole area was well cov- 
ered. During these bombardments 
fire was returned from the shore. 

LAND 

Taking advantage of an improve- 
ment in the weather, Indian troops 
of the Eighth Army have cmb 
lished a bridgehead across the 
River Ronco near Meldola. Else- 
where activity has been confined 
to local actions and artillery duels. 

In one successful local action 
American troops of the Fifth Army 
north of the Bologna-Prato road 
captured 100 prisoners. 

AR 

Weather again prevented bombing 
operations, but fighter-bombers and 
fighters attacked enemy supplies, 


| €Ommunications, rail and river traf- 


fic in the rear of the battle areas. 
In the Balkans bridges, roads and 


| rail communications were attacked 


PUBLIC NOTICES 





DIAMOND-ruby oblong watch case, platinum 
* attachment: also platinum-pear! watch chain. | 
Given by us in error to wrong jeweler Thurs- | 
@ay, Oct. 26, 5:45 P. M. Office Haimes & Kiein, | 
7 W. 45th. Liberal reward return Commodore | 
dewelry Shop, MU 6-8369 | 
MY wife, Ursula Dorothy, having left my bed) 
‘and board, I will nce longer be responsible 
for her debts. ROLAND R. LEWENTHAL 
20 East 35th St.. New York City. 

1 SHALL no longer be res 
curred by my wife, Hele She abandoned | 
bome and children. Henr , Heurg, 1383 6 Av 
Rew York City. 


3 AM no longer ble for any debs con- 
tracted for, by anyone but myself 
R HALLE 


I 
586 Henderson Av, West Brighton. SJ. 
communicate with us, want to help 
you. T. F. C.. DAD. 
Commercial] Notices 
PAINTING AND DECORATING 
Are you planning to redecorate your office 
@ home’? We will place at your disposal a staff 
@f skilled painters who will complete your work 
iciently and promptly. We have no labor 
ortage. Fair Way Construction Co, 246 5 Av, 
New York, AS 4-9600 
LIFE INSURANCE LOANS 
DEAL DIRECT WITH BANK 
No Fees or Brokerage Charge 
LOW INTEREST RATES 
HUDSON County NATIONAL BANK 


1851 
JOURNAL SQ. JERSEY CITY. N J 
REALIZE YOUR AMBITION NOW 
Could you do better in another job? We dis- | 
cover your hidden talents and guide you to 
security at work you will enjoy. Write for free) 
invitation to our Vocational Guidance Clinic. | 
VOCATIONAL ADVANCEMENT CONSULTANTS | 
7 East 42 St MU 2-6216 | 
$25 FUR COAT REMODELING PLAN ives! 
extra years service to old fur coats, includes) 
repairing relining and _ refitting cleaning 
lazing. storage. Fur added at low cost. Harry 
lay Treu, 147 W 35 St, 18th floor, New York. | 
LA 4-6788 
~COLOR-LITHOGRAPHY—PHOTO OFFSET 
COLORCHROME CO, INC 


840 Greenw! St.. N ¥ C. WA 9-4640-1. 
PHOTOS, 8X10, 5c EACH 

Send for samples, price list OK. Moss, 20 
W 23 St. GR 3-3551 ate 
ANNOUNCERS, actors, singers trained for the 
radio. Tel for free test lesson ROBERT 
yon RADIO ACADEMY. 113 W 57th cI 

61 





ch St 


pre- 
$1. | 
MU 


YOUR favorite snapshots permanently | 

served, iifetime plastic process, 6 for 
wg Plastic, 17 E 424. Room 927 
3- 


HANDMADE mahogany wear 
Haiti, charming Xmas gift: importer will 
sell limited stock directly to consumers; some 
samples, one of a kind. Room 506 347 5 5_AY. 
EDITOR- WRIT ER-EXECUTIVE 
Broad experience, newspapers. publications, 
broadcasting. public relations, cultural, or gani 
zations seeks full-part time pos. M606 ) Times. 


USED CARS WANTED IMMEDIATELY 
All makes Wili pay the iimit. Buyers sent) 
anywhere anytime. Times Square Motors, 675 
6 Av «Cor 43d) Cl 6-0235 
LOANS against accounts receivable at moderate 

terms. Apply Bank of Athens Trust Co, 205 
W 33 St Stablished since 1926. PE 6-3500 
Member Federa! Deposit Insurance 
CAN you save $10 per month for an annuity | 

with life insurance? Manhattan Life of 
fers unusual returns Illustration furnished 
Charies Edwards. 551 Sth Av 
NATIONALLY known Rye & Bourbon V Whiskies, | 

also Scotch Canadian Club. Fifth Avenue 
Liguor Store. Inc, 74 W 46 St. BR 9-2378 
* LAKEWOOD Express Limousines leave twice 

Gaily, Manhattan. Bronx, Brooklyn direct 

Goor service. Greenfield, FO 


HIGH cash prices pald for microscopes, tele- 
scopes. binoculars. scientific-laboratory equip- 
ment etc Ross. 70 West Bway. BA 7-8513 


VETERANS’ Discharges reduced to wallet size; 
sealed in tic; everlasting; $1; mail; call 
* IDENT SERV CORP, 1560 Bway. BR 9-7420 


WANT an advance on your salary? Call Miss 
Case. LO 5-1112. to 8:30 P. M Personal 
Finance Co of N Y j 





imported from | 








if 


(20 lines), 





ITA typewritten ‘letters | 
ovelty. 1214 Bway (Rm 406) 

MU 4-1 
SHINY clothes are unsightly; remove 
shine by the French-American Reweaving | 
Co, 100 W 57 St. N ¥Y C. CO 5-8864. | 
for TO 


FIND THE RIGHT JOB 
Read the Help Wanted ads in The New 
York Times for al! kinds of fobs tn al) fields 
EXQUISITE haircuts for women! A new you! 
$1.50 ae ee 379 5 Av(35 St).MU 3-3314 | 
+ — typewriter repairing saves ~ ‘Type- 

eeriter Scones 110 We aad WI ~1220 
ape FRAMES, tarce asx orti moms 

service. Greenwald. 681 Lexir 


Entrance | 


S$. gold, loan tickets < bought 


impire | 
pire State Bulk ’ 


The | 


| Leyte, 
onstbie. for debts in- | COMmuniqueé : 


r 


|—A 


by our fighters. 

Four Allied aircraft are missing 
from the day’s operations. The 
MAAF flew over 400 sorties. 


LAND Forces IN GREECE 


Our ground forces are continuing 
to harass the German rear guard 
north of Kozaini. Guerrilla forces 
are actively cooperating with Brit- 
ish troops in the area and were well 
represented in the closely coordi- 
nated attack which liberated Ko- 
zaini town. 

Further successes of guerrilla 
forces operating against the enemy 
rear guard culminated in the cap- 
ture of Arnissa, approximately 
forty miles north of Kozaini, where 
the German garrison was destroyed. 


ADVANCED HEADQUARTERS, on\ 
(AP)—A| 


Wednesday, Nov. 1 


PHILIPPINES 

Leyte: Our drive up Leyt® Vali- 
ley continues unchecked. In the 
Tenth Corps sector units of the 
Twenty-fourth Division advancing 
on Carigara from Jaro are now 
eight miles from the coast 

Patrols in the Twenty-fourth 
Corps sector are probing westward 
along mountain trails. Behind the 
front lines our forces are consoli- 
dating and establishing intermedi- 
ate bases made necessary by the 
rapidity of our advance. Mopping 
up of small scattered enemy parties 
and snipers is in progress 

Enemy units near Dagami were 
surrounded and destroyed, while re- 
duction of the remaining enemy po- 
sitions at Catmon Hill was nearing 
completion. 

Ineffective local counter-attacks 
and infiltration were encountered 
in the Seventh and Twenty-fourth 
Division sectors 

The enemy continues his efforts 
at reinforcement under cover of 
darkness from Cebu to Leyte. Car- 
rier-based planes strafed and de- 
stroyed or dameged twenty enemy 
barger at Ormoc on the west coast 
Light naval units at night sank 
two luggers on Ormoc Bay, as well 
as two lighters in Surigao Strait 

Enemy air attacks on a smal! 
scale continue Eleven 
planes were shot down 
KANDY, Ceylon, Oct. 31 
ommunique 

LAND 

Northern Burma: Chinese troops 
have consolidated their positions in 
Myothit, twenty-four miles north of 
Bhamo. British troops in the rail- 
road corridor continued their offen- 
sive patrol action in the Mawhun- 
Mawlu area 
Chin Hills: On the Tiddim-Fort 
White road the Japanese are resist- 
ing fiercely around Kennedy Peak 

Elsewhere there is nothing to re- 
port 

AIR 

Aircraft of the Eastern Air Com- 
mand bombed a barracks near 
Hanoi in French Indo-China on the 
night of Oct. 29-30. Other Allied 
aircraft attacked road, rail and riv- 
er traffic in central Burma and in 
the Chindwin region. 

On Oct. 29 two attacks were made 
on a stores’ area at Tayngup. A 
road bridge at Hsenwi was de- 
stroyed and another damaged. 

Enemy positions in the Chindwin 
region were bombed yesterday. 


United States 
CHUNGKING, China, Oct. 31 
United States Army Forces 


China communique 


CENTRAL CHINA 
operations over five fronts 
during the period from Oct. 26 
through Oct. 29 the Fourteenth 
Army Air Force and Maj. Gen 
Claire L. Chennault’s Chinese 
American Wing knocked out the 
Yellow River bridge in the Peiping- 
Hankow railway line, destroyed 
eleven Japanese fighters in the air 
and damaged one, destroyed six 
Japanese bombers in the air and 
four on the ground and killed more 
than 500 Japanese troops in direct 
support of Chinese ground forces 

Two spans of the Yellow River 


In 


Al- 
31 


Goes 


reached the causeway leading 
By evening the ene- 


points 


enemy 


(UP)—A 


(AP)| 


n 


collapsed and third 
under bomb hits, further 
disrupting traffic on the Peiping- 

Hankow railway, a vital line in the 

Japanese interior communications 

in China. 

Fighters again struck at Japa- 
nese communications at Puchi on 
Oct. 27, when the Hankow-Canton 
rail line between Hankow and 
Yochow was hit and a locomotive 
and ten to twelve rail cars were 
destroyed. Three open cars filled 
with Japanese troops were strafed 
with unestimated casualties. Ship- 
ping on the Yangtze was strafed. 

Aircraft returning from a mission 
observed a squadron of enemy 
bombers landing at the Kingmen 
airdrome under fighter cover In 
the engagement that followed 

| eleven fighters were destroyed in 
| the air and one was damaged. Five 
Japanese bombers were shot down 
and four others were destroyed on 
| the ground. Another enemy bomber 
was shot down by fighters during 
an attempted Japanese raid on one 
of our northern bases. 

P-40's of General Chennault's 
Chinese-American Wing on Oct. 27 
attacked the Japanese air base at 
Miangtan, bombed installations, 
runways, factory buildings and 
} revetments and strafed the field, 
causing heavy damage. Fires were 
burning strongly when the fighters 
left to attack a Japanese-held field 
at Paoking. P-40’s of the Compo- 
site Wing bombed and strafed the 
Changsha air strip on the Siang 
River. 


bridge a 


buckled 





SoutH CHINA AREA 

Eighteen fighter missions were 
flown in support of Chinese ground 
forces resisting the Japanese ad- 
vance westward from the West 
River bend. Japanese troop posi- 
tions were attacked by fighters on 
pane] indication of Chinese ground 
units. 

A two-mile column of Japanese 
troops and pack horses was caught 
in a canyon nine miles west of 
Konghow. One hundred enemy 
troops were killed. There was 
ground fire from trapped Japanese. 
P-40’s then dropped fragmentation 
bombs to block both ends of the 
canyon and then strafed the enemy 
column repeatedly, killing an unes- 
timated number of troops. Fighters 
attacked rear supply lines along 
the West River, destroying and 
damaging river shipping near Wu- 
| chow. 

On the Kweilin front aircraft con- 
tinued to attack the Japanese ad- 
vancing around Kaotienho, bombing 
four road bridges, two of which 
were knocked out, and strafing en- 

| emy-occupied positions and com- 
pounds. 


} 
} 
| 
| 
| 


FRENCH INDO-CHINA 


j 
| At Hongay, in the northern 
| ¥ French Indo-China area, on Oct. 28 
| river shipping and railway rolling 
| stock were hit. 
SALWEEN RIvER FRON? 
| Ten missions of P-40's supported 
Chinese ground units operating 
against the Japanese on the Sal- 
ween front between Lungling and 
| Wangshih on Oct. 29 bombing and 
| strafing fortified positions 
| From all these missions four of 


| our planes failed to return to base 


| A later 
lin China communiqué: 


| CENTRAL CHINA AREA 


P-40's of Maj. Gen. Claire L. Chen- 
nault’s Chinese-American Wing 
| knocked out a new bridge at Sinshi, 
on the Mi River four miles west of 
the old bridge. They also bombed 
Kweiyi, a Japanese supply center 
on the railroad between Changsha 
and Yochow. They attacked a five- 
mile area, centering on Paoking, 
strafing an airfield. Twenty Japa- 
nese troops were killed. They 
|} bombed buildings and compounds 
in near-by enemy-occupied villages. 
The Siaokan airfield northwest of 
| Hankow was attacked by P-40's on 
| Oct. 29. Barracks and a radio sta- 
tion were damaged. Three locomo- 
tives were destroyed, one was prob- 
ably destroyed, and rolling stock 
was damaged on the Peiping-Han- 
| kow railway line. 

A delayed report from a mission 
| of Chinese-American B-25’s against 
| the Suchang railyards in the Yel- 
} low River area on Oct. 26 states 
| that 75 per cent of the hits were 
scored on the target. A foundry 

and adjoining railyards were also 
bombed No enemy air opposition 
was encountered 

Another delayed report of a mis- 
sion of P-40’s which, on Oct. 28 
caught an enemy column in a can- 
yon nine miles west of Konghow in 
Kwangsi Province, shows that, in 
addition to 100 Japanese troops 
killed and 200 pack horses destroyed 
by a previous mission of P-51's, the 
P-40's killed 400 Japanese troops 
in the canyon 


| SouTH CHINA AREA 


Adverse weather prevented opera- 
tions of the Fourteenth Air Force 
on the Kweilin and West River 
fronts on Oct. 29 and Oct. 3 


| 
| 
| 
| FRENCH INDO-CHINA 
| 


J 


At Phu Lanthuong in northeast 
French Indo-China P-40’s on Oct, 
29 strafed trucks carrying enemy 
personnel with unestimated casual- 
ties. They also destroyed four junks 
and damaged others 

From all of these missions three 
of our aircraft failed to return. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 
lcific Fleet communiqué 170 

A conservative recapitulation of 
enemy aircraft losses during the 
| past two months from Aug. 30 to 
| the present, reported by the Third 
and Seventh Fleets (the latter oper- 
| ating under General MacArthur), 
shows that 1,462 planes were shot 
down in the air and 1,132 destroyed 
on the ground, making a grand to- 
tal of 2,594 destroyed by Pacific 
Fleet carrier aircraft. In addition, 
planes were probably destroyed 
damaged 
Our own 


(AP)—Pa- 





| 


| 252 
| or 
) losses during this pe 
riod were approximately 300 carrier 
| planes with pilots and air crew 
| losses considetabty less because of 
| rescue operations which saved many 
| lives 
The enemy suffered his greatest 
losses during the following periods 
Sept. 9-24, in the Philippines, by 
the Third Fleet Shot down, 362 
destroyed on ground, 584 
Oct. 10-16, in Nansei and Shoto 
Islands, Philippines, and Formosa 
by the Third Fleet Shot down 
528 destroyed on ground, 304 
damaged, 59 
Oct. 17-18, in 
the Third Fleet 
destroyed on 
aged, 55 
Oct. 22- 
; the 
| and 


by 
55; 
dam- 


the Philippines 
Shot down 


ground, 31 


Second Battle of 
by the Third 

Shot down 
31; dam- 


27, in the 
Philippine Sea, 
Seventh Fleets: 

392; destroyed on ground 
| aged, 20 

Liberators of the Seventh Air 

Force bombed shipping in Chichi 
| Jima harbor, in the Bonins, on Oct 

28 (West Longitude date). Other 

Liberators bombed barges at Haha 
| Jima on the same day. 

Search planes of Fleet Air Wing 1 
| carried out strafing and bombing 
attacks on five email cargo ships at 

Kita Iwo Jima, in the Volcano 
Islands. One of the ships was 
| sunk, one was badly damaged and 
was set ablaze. 

On Oct. 28 Corsair fighters of the 
Second Marine Ajircraft Wing 
| strafed installations at Rota Island. 
| Anti-aircraft fire was intense. The 
| next day Corsairs again bombed 
i 
' 
i 


one 


Rota, hitting the airfield, while 
Thunderbolts of the Seventh Air 
Force bombed Pagan Island. 
Seventh Ai Force Liberators 
bombed the airfield and gun posi 
tions on Yap Island on Oct. 27 and 
28 Corsair fighters of the Second 
Marine Aircraft Wing strafed 
barges at Yap on Oct Anti- 
aircrait fire Was meager 
Vavy communiqué 552 

PaciFic AND Fa® East 
| 1. United States submarines have 
reported the sinking of eighteen 
| vessels, including one combatant 
—_— a result of operations 


28 


as 


against the enemy in these waters, 


as follows: 
Three medium cargo transports, 
one large transport, two small car- 


| States 
|rope communiqué 





| 
| 


Ministry communiqué: 


istries communiqué : 


| que, 
land recorded by the Federal Commu- 
nications Commission 





United States Army Forces| 


| 
| 
| 





| 


cast from Moscow to the Soviet Un- 
ion and reported by the Federal Com- 
munications Commission: 


tary communtqué 
| Moscou 
| ported 
| tions Commission 


their prepared iine. Throwing back 
the enemy, our troops broke into 
the town of Kecskemet, where they 
engaged in street fighting. This 
town has about 80,000 inhabitants 
and is a large railway junction. 

In East Prussia artillery duels 
took place. To the north of the in- 
habited locality of Grosstrakehnen 
the enemy carried out fighting re- 
connaissance. The Hitlerites were 
dispersed before they reached the 
forward edge of our defenses. In 
another sector a detachment of Ger- 
man tommy-gunners, supported by 
tanks, attacked positions of X unit 
The gun crews of Sergeant Major 
Egosoff, Sergeant Bogolieff and 
Lance Corporal Sidoroff opened fire 
and destroyed two tanks and two 
armored carriers. Most of the Ger- 
man tommy-gunners were annihi- 
lated. 

The Air Arm of the Northern 
Fleet struck at German ships in 
Tana Fjord gnd the port of Vardoe 
As the result of direct hits, a sup- 
ply ship of 2,000 tons, a patrol ves- 
sel, a tug patrol, a motor launch 
and four motor boats were sunk 

The Air Arm of the Red Banner 
Baltic Fleet sank in the southern 
part of the Baltic Sea an enemy 
supply ship of 4,000 tons, In addi- 
tion, another German supply ship 
was destroyed in the port of Libau 
(Liepaja). 


> 4 
iugoslav 

a pew posal re er — ter $ communiqué, as broad- 
man Ispatcnea over 0OUO aircraft és , 

The industrial and railway cente. |" oy the Pree Fugesios vedio 
of Cologne was the main objective | serbo-Croat and reported by the Fed- 
and some 4,000 tons of high explo- |eral Communications Commission: 
sive and incendiary bombs were Continuing offensive operations 
dropped in a concentrated attack in Dalmatia, our units liberated 
through cloud. The glow of large | Imotski and are pursuing the en- 
fires was observed. emy toward Mostar. Beibirske 

Two attacks were made on Berlin | Mostine in northern Dalmatia has 
by Mosquitos, one before the attack | been occupied. Our units from that 
on Cologne, and the other soon sector and those advancing from 
afterward. the line of Svilaja-Perkovic are 

Night fighters and intruder air- tightening the encirclement around 
craft of the Bomber Command sup- | the enemy on the line of Sibenik 
ported the bombers and attacked | [Sebenico]-Drinis-Knin. — 
airfields over a wide area. Continuing operations in Herce- 

Yesterday afternoon Mosquitos of | 8°vina, our units hemmed in a 
the RAF Coastal Command de- | Strong enemy column near Dubrava 
stroyed an enemy aircraft off the | 0" the Stolac-Mostar roda, for the 
Norwegian Coast. annihilation of which they have 

From these operations two air- been fighting for two days. Far- 


ae be ave | ther north our units are fighting 
— the Bomber Command are for the town of Nevesinje, where 


. the enem ring rate re- 
A jotnt Air and Home Security Min- sistance. y is offering desperate re 
In the 


go transports, one destroyer, four | 
small cargo vessels, five medium 

cargo vessels, one medium tanker 

and one small auxiliary. 

2. These actions have not 
announced in any previous 
Department communiqué 


(AP)—A 
Forces 


been 
Navy } 


United 
m Hu- 


a1 
Aw 


LONDON, Oct 
Strategic 


reveal 
Min 
by 
the 
Alr 
Divi- 
condi- 


Reconnaissance pictures 
that the Mittelland Cana! at 
den, Germany, was breached 
bombs from B-24 Liberators of 
the United States Eighth 
Force, Second Bombardment 
sion, under adverse weather 
tions on Oct. 26 

Kighty-five feet of the canal wall 
was destroyed by a direct hit. Near 
hits weakened the wall at other 
points and damaged a _ near-by 
barge repair works. Water rushing 
through the breach drained the 
canal dry for about three miles, | 
leaving at least thirty barges and 
tugboats stranded 

The Mittelland Canal is the most 
important east-west internal 
waterway in Germany, linking 
central and eastern Germany with 
the Ruhr Valley and the Rhine- 
land. 





British 


Oct. 31 


(AP)—An 


LONDON, Air 


Boka Kotorska_ sector 
Hercegnovi was liverated after 
fierce battles lasting three days, 
and then, deeper in Boka Meljine, 
Zelenika and Kumbor were lib- 
erated. The enemy garrisons of 
, these places have been almost com- 
destroyed by our fighters over the | pletely wiped out except for indi- 
North Sea viduals who fled by boat to Tivat. 
—_ —-—— All enemy weapons, military equip- 

ment and a number of ships fell 

French _ 


into our hands 
Yesterday’s First Army North of Boka our units occu- 
as broadcast from 


During darkness and again in 
daylight the enemy directed flying 
bombs against southern England, 
including the London area. Damage 
and casualties were caused. 

One HE 111 carrier aircraft was 





communi- | 


Brazzaville| Pi¢éd Njegus and Krstac, important 


German strong points on the 
Cetinje-Kotor [Cattaro] communi- 
cation line. In the Podgorica sec- 
tor battles are being waged against 
a German division that had fought 
its way from Albania via Scutari. 

Continuing the offensive in Syr- 
mium [Srjem], our units, cooperat- 
ing with Red Army troops in the 
western part of the Fruska Cora 
Mountain, conquered the enemy 
strong points of Suesk [Lug], Stari- 
Divos, Lezimir, Grgurevci and 
Mandijelosa. Fierce fightin con- 
tinues aiong the line of Srmeska- 
Mitrovica-Veliki-Radinci. 

In the Kraljevo-Cacak sector 
battles continue. Fighting is going 
on against a strong German group 
that attempted to fight its way 
through from Cacak to Uzicka 
Pozega. 

In Sanjak strong enemy forces, 
after several days of intense fight- 
ing, penetrated from Sjenica into 
Prijepolje, having sustained heavy 
losses. Our units wrecked all 
bridges over the Lim. German 
forces are very active from Pec 
toward the Plav Basin and from 
Ibar in the direction of Rozaj. For- 
ward elements of these enemy 
forces have been repulsed. 

In the Podujevo sector our units 
and Bulgarian units are waging 
violent battles against strong Ger- 
man forces, overcoming the re- 
sistance of the enemy and advanc- 
ing on Mitrovica and Pristina. 

In Macedonia our units and Bul- 
garian units are engaged in stub- 
born fighting on the lines of the 
Rivers Pcinja and Strumica against 
German forces that are protecting 
the withdrawal of their remaining 
troops from Greece via the Vardar 
communication line, and repulsing 
Germans from Kicevo to the north 
Our units are fighting near Gos- 
tivar itself 

In eastern Bosnia violent battles 
are in progress along the line of 
Brecko-Bijeljina-Janja A strong 
German motorized force succeeded 
in fighting its way from Janka into 
Svornik, where it is blocked. The 

surrounded enemy group in Vise- 
grad is defending itself desperately. 

In Croatia eleven trains carrying 
troops and war material were de- 
railed and thirty technical objec- 
tives were wrecked on the com- 
munications lines of Vinkovci-Brod, 
Zagreb-Sasak-Noveka, Zagreb-Kar- 
lovac-Ogulin and Zagreb-Varazdin. 
A total of 1,100 Germans were 
killed and 350 taken prisoner in 
these actions. In Gorski Kotar 
fighting continues for Vbrovsko, 
where the surrounded enemy is of- 
fering tough resistance 

In Slovenia a train was derailed 
and 150 Germans killed on the rail- 
way line of Dravograd-Klagenfurt 
German columns that had set out 
from Maribor were routed on the 
northern slopes of Pohorje. One 
hundred and thirty German bodies 
were found on the scene of the 
fighting 

In the Slovene littoral our units 
| again raided the communications 
| line of Gorizia-Piedicolle and Go- 

rizia-San Pietro. Several technical 

objectives were destroyed and traf- 
fic was suspended 


fn the Vosges the enemy, feeling 
the effects of recent failures, is 
less aggressive. All attempts at in- 
filtration into our advanced posi- 
tions have been repulsed with 
losses. Our artillery is very vigi- 
lant, keeping up a rapid and ac- 
curate fire on the enemy rear 

In the northern part of the Doubs 
sector a rapidly conducted ma- 
neuver has enabled us to improve 
our positions. The enemy coun- 
tered with artillery fire. Our re- 
connaissance patrols remain active 
in all sectors. 

Improved atmospheric conditions 
in the Alps have enabled our ad- 
vanced detachments to continue 
their drive toward the mountain 
pass region. The enemy infantry 
is not very active. On the other 
hand, the German artillery has 
been keeping up a heavy fire in 
the Briabeonnate and the Ubaye 
Valley areas, while the French ar- 
tillery 1s engaged in firing against 
the numerous defense positions 
held by the enemy. 


Russian 
Yesterday’s communiqué, as broad- 


Oct. 31, northeast and 
of the Hungarian town 
of Nyiregyhaza, our troops fought 
their way into more than fifty in- 
habited localities, including the 
town and railway station of Haj- 
dunanas, the town and rajlway 
station of Hajdudorog and the 
large inhabited localities of Ujke- | 
nez, Tornyospaloza, Anarcs, Gyula- 
haza, Nyirkarasz, Nyirtass, Petne- 
haza and Ramocsahaza and the 
railway stations of Ujkenez, Kopoc- 
sapati and Kako 

The town of Nyiregyhaza, which 
in the course of the fighting re- 
peatediy changed hands, has again 
been occupied by our troops 

In the Budapest direction, be- 
tween the Rivers Tisza and Dan- | 
ube, our troops fought offensive ac- 
tions in the course of which they 
occupied more than 200 inhabited 
localities of Alpar, Izsak, Kalocsa, 
Csaszatoeltes, Hajos Alsomegy, 
Homokmegy, Miske, Batya, Fajaz, 
Dusnok, Nemesnadudvar. Suekoesd 
and Ersekesanad and the railway 
stations of Koharyszentloerince, 
Urret, Puszta-Paka, Karhankoez, 
Balloszeg, Pirto and Kalocsa 

Our troops have broken into the 
town of Kecskemet, where they 
have engaged the enemy in street | 
battles. | 
In fighting between the Rivers 
Tisza and Danube our troops took 
4.018 Germans and Hungarians 
prisoner 

In other sectors of the front re- 
connaissance activity and, at a 
number of places, fighting of local 
importance took place 

During Oct. 30 our troops on all 
fronts disabled or destroyed 14 
German tanks. In air battles and 
by anti-aircraft fire fifty enemy 
planes were brought down 

The Tuesday midnight suppiemen 
as broadcaat 
to the Soviet press and 
by the Federal Communica 


During 
southwest 


from! 
ne Rumanian 

Yesterday's communiqué 
southweat of the 
Nyireghyaza 


Northeast and 
Hungarian town of 
our troops advanced up to twenty 
kilometers and captured the towns 
of Hajdunanas and Hajdudorog 
which were strong points in the 
enemy defenses 

Particularly fierce fighting took 
place in the area of the town of 
Nyireghyaza The enemy, having 
concentrated large forces of tanks 
and infantry, launched a counter- 
attack and broke into the town 
But all German attempts to hold 


Communica- 


Federai 
fions Commitsston 

In northeastern Hungary Ruman- 
ian troops, in collaboration with 
Soviet forces, succeeded In crush- 
ing the enemy's resistance and in 
advancing toward the Tisza on 4 
broad front A number of locall- 
ties have been taken 

Between the Tisza and the Dan- 
ube in the Kecskemet area, Soviet 
and Rumanian forces penetrated 
this large communications center deep into the enemy's positions and 
were frustrated by the determined gained considerable ground. 
operations of Soviet units By Sea = 


powerful blows our tanks and in P 
Bulgarian 


fantry broke the enemy's resistance 
and recaptured the town of 
Yesterday's communiqué, as broad- 
Sofia and re- 


Nyireghyaza 
In the course of fighting, up to | cast domestically from , 
1,500 German and Hungarian offi- |ported by the Federal Communica- 
tions Commission: 
In the sector west of the Morava 


cers and men were annihilated and 
seventeen tanks and self-propelled 

guns were either disabled or burned River the enemy, under threat of 

out having his communications cut, 

In the Budapest direction, be- brough up reinforcements and 

launched strong counter-attacks 

and, at the price of heavy losses, 


tween the Rivers Danube and Ti- 
8za, our troops occupied more than 

succeeded in recapturing insignifi- 
cant territories 


200 inhabited localities. Soviet 
In other sectors our units con- 


units have broken the enemy de- 

fenses on a broad front and are 

fighting their way ahead The solidated their successes despite 

Germans and Hungarians have strong counter-attacks by the 

hastily brought up fresh reserves. enemy, who was attempting to 

Carrying out impetuous outflank- better his positions. 

ing maneuvers, our troops are in- In the Pcinja Valley bridgehead 

vesting garrisons and groups of | positions establishd on the western 

enemy troops and then annihilat- shore, today were widened and 
strengthened All enemy counter- 

attacks trying to repulse our ad- 


ing them 
In one area two 

headquarters of the vancing unite were unsuccessful 

Hungarian Infantry Division were | During these activities one of our 

encircled and routed The com batteries distinguished itself by 

mander of the division was killed succeeding in halting and repelling 

A large number of prisoners was one of the enemy's counter-attacks 

taken Among the prisoners is a after inflicting heavy losses 

group of staff officers headed by West of Kocane our troops con- 

the deputy commander of the tinue to pursue the retreating 

Twenty-third Hungarian Division enemy, inflicting heavy losses 

More than thirty German tanks More than twenty villages were 
liberated including Beli, Trakani, 

Gorni and Dolni Podlak, Otleshovo, 


were burned out or disabled 
In another sector units of X for- 

Banya, Monastir, Pantchovo and 

other places 


mation, forging ahead. repelled sev- 
In the Str ica Valley our units 


er, enemy counter-attacks The 
are waging fierce battle against 


reported by the 


regiments and 
Twenty-third 


H@@erites threw ints ittle large 
infantry forces. but could not hold 


t 
| 


| 


the enemy, with hand-to-hand 
fighting in places. 

Bomber squadrons, accompanied 
by fighters, attacked enemy bat- 
tery positions in the region east 

Kumanovo. A freight train 
south of Kumanovo was attacked 
with satisfactory results. Six 
enemy batteries were damaged. 
Three of our fighters did not re- 
turn to their bases. 


Finnish 
Yesterday's communiqué, as broad- 


cast domestically in Finland and re- 
ported by the Federal Communica- 


| tions Commission 


| Federal 


| 


m7! 


i 
as broad- 


cast domestical lly from Bucharest and! 


| 


cast from 


Village has been 
Fierce battles are 
German positions 


cap- 
being 
north 


Muonio 
tured 
waged at 
of Vuotso 


Chinese 


Yesterday's communiqué, as broad- 
Chungking in English to 
America and recorded by the 
Communications Commis- 


North 


ston 
YUNNAN FRON’ 

After six more days of minor 
ground activity in the Lungling- 
Mangshih area, our forces on Oct. 
29 made several successful attacks 
on enemy positions. An estimated 
seventy enemy casualties, among 
which thirty dead were counted, 
were caused when our troops took 
a hill two and one-half miles 
southwest of Lungling and cut off 
another three miles southwest of 
that city. 

In the Mangshih area al) posi- 
tions except one on the Japanese 
strong point of Hungyuenshan, 
three miles northeast of Mangshih, 
had been taken before dark. These 
attacks were supported by Ameri- 
can fighter-bombers. 

Other attacks east and southeast 
of Mangshih were unsuccessful, al- 
though part of the enemy positions 
were occupied by the initial as- 
sault, 

On Oct. 27 our forces caught six 
enemy trucks and a light tank on 
the Burma Road about eleven 
miles southwest of Mangshih and 
destroyed all of the trucks and 
killed thirty enemy troops. 

Air activity on the Burma and 
Bhamo roads for the ten days pre- 
ceding Oct. 26 caused an estimated 
1,000 enemy casualties. 

During the past week American 
planes plastered Chefang, Wan- 
ting, Mangshih, Muse and Meng- 
nao, completely bombing out 
Mengnao and causing many fires 
and large explosions in the other 
regions. Bridges at Wanting and 
Ganghkan were also attacked and 
the anting bridge completely de- 
stroyed. 


A later communiqué: 


NORTHERN KWANGSI 


On Oct. 30 the enemy to the east 
of the outer defenses of Kweilin at- 
tacked westward in three routes. 
One column thrust to about ten 
kilometers northeast of Kweilin to 
cross the Kwei River, but was 
beaten back. Another enemy col- 
umn advanced to about fifteen 
kilometers southeast of Kweilin, 
where the enemy attempt at cross- 


| 





ing to the south bank of the Kwei 


River was foiled by our force. A 
third enemy unit attacked our line 
about ten kilometers east of Kwei- 
lin, whefe severe fighting is pro- 
ceeding. 

EASTERN KWANGSI 


The enemy force halted by our 
troops forty kilometers west of 
Pingnam made several attacks on 
our positions on Oct. 30. All the 
enemy attacks were repulsed. 

HUNAN Front 

Our t s counter-attacking 
Tungan on Oct. 29 recaptured two 
strong points six kilometers north- 
west and about twenty kilometers 
northeast of the city. 

Launching surprise attacks on en- 
emy transport ships on the Siang 
River, thirty kilometers northwest 
of Changsha, one of our units on 
Oct. 25 sank a total of thirty-nine 
enemy ships in a single day. 


German 


LONDON, Oct. 31 (UP) 
communiqué, as broadcast from Ber- 
lin and recorded by The United 


Press: 

Under the impact of the sustained 
defense of the German garrisons 
the enemy yesterday did not con- 
tinue his attacks either against the 
fortress of Dunkerque nor against 
the German bridgehead northeast 
of Brugge (Bruges) 

In heavy fighting German troops 
who have been fighting in South 
{Zuid] Beveland have withdrawn 
to Walcheren. The Canadians, who 
wanted to force an entry into 
Walcheren, were smashed by con- 
centrated fire. In the battle in 
northern Brabant the enemy con- 
centrated tank formations § into 
strong wedges for a break-through, 
particularly between Roosendaal 
and Breda and east of Oosterhout. 

In an embittered defense and 
hard fighting German troops have 
frustrated all attempts aiming at 
breaking up the German front, and 
halted advancing enemy divisions 
before prepared bridgehead posi- 
tions south of the Lower Maas 
{Meuse} and in the Maas estuary. 

German counter-attacks south- 
east of Helmond resulted in im- 
provements in positions. Enemy 
counter-attacks failed. In_ this 
fighting eighty-five enemy tanks 
were knocked out within three 
days. 

In the forest between the Upper 
Muerthe and Mortagne there also 
was fierce fighting yesterday. The 
Americans, who attacked time and 
time again, advanced only a little 
beyond their original positions. A 
German attack northeast of Re- 
miremont hit attacking American 
battalions 

London was again subjected 
V-1 fire 

In central Italy the enemy ta the 
western front sector in vain at- 
tacked the area of Castelnuovo 
Stubborn resistance by German 
troops frustrated enemy attacks 
southwest of Vergato. After strong 
artillery preparation the British 
were able to force a crossing of the 
Ronco River north of Meldola 

German strong point garrisons 
that have been left on several 
Aegean islands after the evacua- 
tion of Greece are engaged in fight- 
ing against landed enemy torces 
on Melos and Piskopi. 

In the Balkans Bulgarian at- 
tacks against German positions 
east of the Vardar Valley were re- 
pelled At Pristina, and also on 
the western Morava, the situation 
is not appreciably changed in spite 
of continuous Soviet pressure 3e- 
tween the Danube and Lower Tisza 
the enemy, with newly brought- up 
formations, is advancing in the di- 
rection of Kecskemet. German and 
Hungarian battle planes effectively 
attacked the enemy, attacking 
spearheads. Anti-aircraft artillery 
of the Luftwaffe destroyed twenty- 
three tanks there yesterday. 

At Ungvar ([Uzhorod) German 
counter-attacks pressed together on 
a@ narrow space the enemy who has 
broken through in one sector. In 
the eastern Beskids the enemy 
again suffered heavy losses in vain 
attacks. 

According to preliminary data 
over 10,000 prisoners were taken in 
actions against Slovak bands in 
the centers of Zvolen and Banska 
Bystrica, and over 100 guns of all 
caliber, as well as 600 motor ve 
hicles and one armored train were 
— In addition, innumerable 


IT’S FUN 


Say Berlitz students about 

— a @ study the Berlitz 
No drudgery. 26 lan- 

quauen. 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. 


BERLITZ 


A German 


to 


630 Fifth Aye. 
(at 50th St.) 
Cirele 6-1416 


—_—— 


of weapons and 
ment fell into German 
Mopping up of the area 
remnants of rebels under the 
command still is in progress 

On the Narew the Soviets re 
sumed their atacks on both sides 
of Ostenburg (|Pultusk], but did 
not achieve appreciable success. ‘In 
the batle in the East Prussian bor 
der area, lasting fourteen days, a 
German formation under the com 
mand of Infantry General Hoss 
back has halted a Soviet offensive 
and has defeated the enemy with 
very heavy losses More than 
thirty-five rifle divisions and nu 
merous tank formations failed in 
the face of a stubborn will to resist 
and the determined counter-attacks 
of German divisions and exemplary 
deployment of German Volkssturm 

Materia! losses of the Soviet also 
are high. Between Oct. 16 and Oct 
28, 1,066 tanks, 330 guns and forty- 
eight planes were destroyed there 
or captured by troops of the Army. 
Flying formations and anti-aircraft 
artillery of the Luftwaffe fleet 
commanded by Col. Gen. Ritter von 
Griem shot down sixty-four Soviet 
planes, and during the same period 
in the East Prussian fighting area 
knocked out 189 tanks 

In northwestern Latvia the 
emy continued his large scale at 
tacks on an increased scale south 
east of Liepaja [Libau] in the area 
of Auce. After a heavy struggle a 
Soviet attempt at a break-through 
was frustrated and 111 enemy tanks 
were knocked out 

Enemy terror planes attacked 
Hamburg, Muenster, Hamm and 
the Rhineland area in daylight, 
and at night Cologne. In addition, 
Berlin was the target of fast Brit- 
ish planes last night. 


equip- 
hands 
from the 
Soviet 


quantities 


en 


Japanese 


A communiqué, as broadcast 


States and recorded by 


Communications 


Attack 


sure- 


1. The Kamikaze 
Corps are continuing 


Special 
their 


yes- 
terday from Tokyo in English to the 
United 
Federal 
sion; 


the 
Commis 


“1The Texts of the L Day’s Communiques on the Fighting in Various War Zones 


death and sure-hit attacks 
the enemy task and 
in the waters east of the 
pines.and the Gulf of Leyte 
Oct. 25. The war results att 
by the corps known up to 
are 
Sunk 


force 


sin 
ained 
now 
Three aircraft carriers. one 
cruiser and one transport 
Damaged Six aircraft 
two battleships, two cruisers 
transport and three warships 
unknown type. 

2 Latest information 
that the following results are to 
be added to the list previously an 
nounced regarding the sea battle 
off the Philippines 

Enemy warships sunk 
cruiser and two destroyers 
Damaged: Two aircraft carriers 
and three cruisers or destroyers 


lers 
one 
of 


cart 


confirms 


One 


ee 


POLITICAL ADVERTISEMENT 


HEAR 


DEWEY 


TONIGHT 


STATIONS 


WEAF annWOR 
at 9:30 P. M. 


Paid Political Advertisement 
By Republican Nationa! 
Committee, New York City 





Smart Styles for Men — unusual 
in quality — far superior to the 
average grades. 


English Ribbed — Fine Wool — neat stripes 
or fancy patterns — sizes 10 to 11% 


—$2.75—$3.50 a pasr 


Fine Quality 6/3 Ribbed — 100% Wool — 


Plain Colors 


black, navy, brown — also 


Smart Mixtures of blue and grey or brown 
and grey — sizes 10% to 13 —$2.00 4 pair 


Sf. Sulka & & jompanyp 


naw yvor« (22) 


BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES 
Capital Wanted 


WELL established chemical manufacturing 
and package business of standing and 
——— has openings for 2 gentlemen. 
uties will be plant operation, mainten- 
ance and supervision. Character, ability 
and willingness to work most important 
Each man to purchase an interest of 24% 
per cent for $25,000 and fill vacancies of 
vice president and treasurer at annual 
salary of $12,500. Principals only. Write 
fully in confidence. References exchanged 
Box 624 T, 217 7 Av 
YOUNG man, recently closed 
business in South. wishes start similar 
business here; partner with $15,000 need- 
bank and D&B references. T330 Times 
CAPITAL and services of ecxpd business 
man available to individual or corpora- 
tion offering above average potentials 
0236 Times 


Capital to Invest 
EXECUTIVE 
Successful business man, exper 
sales dist but n 
production, advert 
nection. know tobace mucts and ad 
will invest up to $25,000 X2670 Tim 


Business Connections 
SOUND BUSINESS 
POSSIBILITIES 

ARGENTINA 

100% RELIABLE AND EXPERIENCED 
AMERICAN IMPORT AND EXPORT FIRM 
ESTABLISHED IN BUENOS AIRES DE- 
SIRES TO CONTACT CONCERNS WISH- 
ING TO BE REPRESENTED IN THAT 
IMPORTANT MARKET WRITE ED. B 
COVEY, AVDA R. S. PENA 616, BUENOS 
“501 ARGENTINA 


ERN = *SALIFORNIA 


PACIFIC. COAST 
REPRESENTATION 


New products desired for distribution. 
Household items of quality wanted for dis- 
tribution thru wholesale & retail channels 

Also manufactured products for use in 
pDiants and factories 

Portable heating- -cooling air-conditioning 
units desired now or post-war. O363 Times 
CONTRACT and franchioe negotiator, ex- 

pertenced sales promotion and pubiic 
relations, establishing N. Y. office, desires 
represent principal mn exclusive basis 
Commission compensation preferable. Prin- 
cipals only. Must stand rigid investiga- 
tion. 0235 Times 7 
REPUTABLE Australian food company de- 

sires manufacturing end/or distributing 
rights for good salable food lines now of 
-war period. Replies to M. N. F. 
fealth Stores Pty.. Ltd.. 171 Liverpool St. 
Sydney. Australia 
CONTRACTORS (N. J.) home improve- 
ment work roofing siding. insulation 
ete good ' ity ff eliable con 
tractor t onnection 
X2588 ‘limes 
ESTABLISHED ADHESIVE FIRM 
fs seeking distributorship eclaimed or 
syntheti ubbe eme giues and kin 
dread products. X2478 
CPA New clients taxes 
thoroug) reasonable Lord 


Distributers Wanted 


Commercial refrigerator distrib- 
ypportun! edr! San 


successful 


lence 
mat 
ising. seeking 


nake ermaher 


imes 


bookkeeping 


TR 5-510 


WANTED 
utors, big 
Antonio. Tex 
Manutacturing Facilities 
COPPER PLATING 
Rochelle Salts & Du Pont Coppe 
ER 8.000 GALS SOLUTION CAPACITY 
LARGE PARTS 
AUTOMATIC CONVEYOR 
PARTS. BARREL PLATED 
Aliso Zinc Plating. Cronaking, Lriditing 
Brass. Tin. Hard Chromium. ete 
AMERICAN ELECTRO 
PLATING WORKS, Inc 
6% 11 Av. NYC CI 46-7373 
MASTERS at WELDING 
SPOT AND PROJECTION 
Extensive facilities plus top-notch 
craft ‘ ' erfect 
No job te ar 
na Yr iT 
Bronze Chrome Moly ‘steel 
Cast Iron and Stainiess Steel 
Brazing & Silver Soldering—all alloys 
Also Sand Blasting & Metal Fabrication 
Army & Navy Approved Finishers 
A. & F. WELDING & MACHINE WORKS. 
: 529 W 50 St CI 6-2975 
SUBCON LRACTS wanted on two 4-inch 
capacity screw machines. Open time now 
available ulck deliveries assured. Tele- 
phone MA 1497 or contact O'Hara Broth- 
ers Machine Co.. 28 S. Wycombe Av, Lans- 
downe, Pa ae 4 
TAPPING & THREADING 
AND MACHINING 
Open facilities for quantity production 
NATIONAL FOUNDRY CO OF N Y¥ 
10 Sanford St. Bklyn, N Y. EV_7-4233 
MACHINE shop, well equipped, experi- 
enced personnel. is open for work on 
screw machines, lathes, millers and drill 
presses. Standard, 306 W 37 St. BR 9-8330 
SPRAYING, tacquecring: large 
wanted from reliable organizatior 
Finishing, 45 W Bway WA 5-861 
SMALL shop desires die, jig and fixture 
work Westenburge 1% Bayview A 
Staten Island 9 rOttenville 8-2344 
SILK Sereen printing facilities availabic 
for posters and displays. Fashion. 203 
. 18 St. GR 80 
BINDERY wan@a, 
ume of carbon 
Times 
WANTED add gauce, jig, dic —— & fix- 
tures; quick delivery Del Mach & 
Tool Co, 387 Bway. CA 6- “92. 
WANTED. productn, machining or stamp- 
ing work requiring complicated tooling 
Mr. Smith. CA 6-3881. FS440 . 
SPRAYING facilities for small jk vail 
able. Quick delivs. Makdon ¢ w 8 


tles Fr 


ov 


FULLY 
SMALL 


ge or too small 


Expert ing. 


contract 
Excel 


vol- 


K105 


te handle large 
snap-out work 


Manutacturing Facilities 

“SPRAYING, BAKING & ENAMELING 

Facilities open for civilian and war prods. 
IMPERIAL ENAMELING CO, 

1680 Coney Island Av, Bkiyn ES 5-145 

industrial Materials 


~Waterials, if on priorities, are wibject~ 
_to Wer Production Board 
- STEEL AVAILABLE — 
FOR IMMEDIATE DELIVERY 
to industrial plants & exporters. 
Cold rolled low carbon 
Stamping anc drawing steel 
High carbon spring steel 
Tempered or annealed 
Coils or .traight lengths. 
Sites %,”“ to 12” wide. 
002 to .187 ¢t 
© REcto 9828 
STEEL TAPE CO 
26 Cornelison Av, Jersey City 
VALVES 
Steel, Bronze, Iron 


ALSO PIPE-FITTINGS 


Comesete, ss k for st —, wow 
Dianta iveries t ail 
THE IDE AL SU PP L ¥ co. 
1105 Summit Av, Jersey City T NZ 
REctor 2-7062 


GAUGES 


IMMEDIATE SeLsvens 
New ring thread and plug ¢ 4 
Standard and special 

Feuer & Co. 1150 Bway. MU 3-9435 
“MAGNET WIRE 
stock. Brown Electri 


Phor 


th sizes in _ ca & 
43 
Plants and Factcries 
HEALTHY Commercial Advertising, Wana- 
facturing Calendars and Speciaities bual- 
ness, with printing plant. tn central Penn- 
syivania city: estab 1993; modern equip- 
ment: reserve stock and materials pilus 
many orders, accounts repeat yearly: won- 
derful post-war possibilities with capacity 
to double oresent business: new. mocern 
factory, 3-story & basement, brick & steel. 
fireproofed; sprinklered 12.738 & oor 
exceptional @pportunity: owner re- 
ng but will assist successor {f desired 
principals with $135.000 should investigate 
this sacrifice offer. X2003 Times 
A Modern Equipped — 
Machine Tool Plant 
tin Bridgeport. Conn. founded im 1928. ap- 
proximately 11.000 sq ft of floor space 
5 buildings; over an acre of land along 
a freight shuttle line: surrounded with 
a Paige fence: suitable for most any typ 
of manufacturing; price $100.000 2 
Times 
FOR SALE! Medium-size machine shes. 
Phila area. well ulpped: favorable per- 
sonnel doing profitabi« buriness will 
stand rigid investigation: good reason for 
pins deal with orincipal only x 
Imes 
— Dy = new im operation = sale 
f waah ts er . 
cated in Brot nx. Wri taah ‘a Micieit 
Piace, Bk N Y¥ 
ron wALy fully equipped. machine sad 
heat treating plant inquire at 114-3 
South 8 St. Brookiyn pen at « 'imes 
for imapection 


Printing Plants and Machinery 


LIQUIDATION up - te - date typesetting 
plant Model ¢ centering device Mode 
7M. 90 fonts. latest faces. mats @ maga- 
Miller beneh saw. Kelly and maga 
© rack I pe & Printers Reoslr & 
Supply « 70 Lafayette CA 4-TSRA 


Stores, Depts. & Concessions 
CONFECTIONERY, stationery ctore, well 
establl shed grosses WOOO veer eng 

on ¥. price $15,000, casm $12,000 


tel P 


rines 


M450 mes 

CORNER dairy store for sale, 
ocations. Bronx Ca ol 

twee r 

CIGAR store corner of 1 
wher died. James V. Kilroe 

mW 44th 

RADIO service man 
repair concession: percentage 

profit making Call Wit )-3L™s 

MEAT market excellent business, sefl be- 
suse f ness Pete's Meat Market, 
74158 Ay ‘Al }- 9699 


Stores, Depts., Concessions Wanted 


WANTED, to purchase, « .— package 
_Store or license. P O Box 6, Trenton. N J. 


Beauty and Barber Shops 


BEAUTIFUL Modecraft equipped Lag 
Salon, best section Forest Hills. 4 
X2755 Times 


Restaurants, Bars, Grills 
CAFETERIA, © days; long tease, bee 
from mogstgagee: good opportunity. <A. 
Zasiaveky, 1472 Bway, Rm 311. 


Garages—Gasoline ‘Stations 


GARAGE, Manhattan, 5 years, 475 rend, 
__ 51,300 storage: $6,000. CI 7-487 


Miscellaneous 


MAIL order business for sale, $4,008 cash: 
earning better than $5.000 yearty: reason 

health; real chance for independence: iong 

established: well known X2507 Times 

PHOTO studio for sale, established 7 rears, 
complete. BE 6-2646 


Wanted—Miscellaneous 
E NTIRE STOCKS BOUGHT 


casl general merchandise 

fashery ‘ary (goods shoes lot 
wen et I Robins 7 
N Y C. SP 17-3057 
DRY GOODS, piece goods. specialties. 
lothing. etc entire stocks and jobs 
bought for cash. Empire Retailers. 438 
Bway. CA 6-3866 
PAY high price dry goods, 

general merchandise, fixtures. Hail 
& Goldberg. 38 Walker St. CA 6-0566. 
CASH buyer pays stores, 
stocks, merchandise. Holla Wave & 
GR 5-7770, 5-2737 
FRIEND pays cash stores, 
m handise. 7 Bway. AL 


ene of best 
23-4417 »e- 


Av and M4 %t; 
attorney. 


radio 
sco4 


te take 


ver 
Seals 


c. - 
Broadway, 


machinery, 
4-4335-414. 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. ee L 


MATHUR PRAISES Reinforcements Arrive at Leyte and Our Men Push Inland to Liberate Peoples of the Philippines 
NENFOR VICTORIES rye 


Order No. 1 Expresses His 
‘Admiration and Gratitude’ 
for Philippines Blows 


FILIPINOS RECEIVE THANKS 


Infantry Advances to Carigara 
Bay, Eight Miles From West 
Coast of Leyte 


ADVANCE HEADQUARTERS, | 
on Leyte, Oct. 31 (®i—Gen Doug- 
las MacArthur’s invasion forces 
have given him a firm grasp on the 
Philippines, he said today, “and I 
shall not relax the grip until Ba-| 
taan and Corregidor once more rise 
to life.” 

“Almighty God has blessed our 
arms,” he said in his field-dated 
general order No. 1, which praised 
the men who participated in the 
invasion for their ‘determination, | 
fortitude and courage.” 

TEXT OF THE ORDER 

The text of the order follows: 

Now that its initial phases have | 

been successfully accomplished, | Pai a Ca : aad ; ¥ ; J 

as Commander in Chief of the | ce =. oti aS Bi FEES aie. i . . : 7 ae 
campaign to liberate the Philip- | (me Pe Ba, a te _ ‘ ‘ ; ‘ tel Americans take cover from Japanese machine-gun fire as they move forward = 
pine Islands, I wish to express 4 ~~ ee gi ‘ ‘ ™ we. Associated Press Wirephot 

} > 


the admiration and gratitude I | ERTS: ; 6 ip PE ii ; “e ny cs Pi os : : 
 . oe ds : A, ee re \ tak Ve B. < AUSTRALIA RECALLS 


feel to all commanders and to all 3 
ranks for the determination, is cable DPE $ Pes, & die .  % ’ “ , 
fortitude and courage they have ip te A a , ee aa at : i : ” he PR 
displayed under the most diffi- ek a “ra ’ “~ sf “ wy PACIFIC ARMY TO REST 
cult, dangerous and complex situ- Pg ; ee af f “a Pit ‘ ; ‘ “ - oe , 
ations Sah wey” han ee é “ ee : sa : 
The magnificent coordination . : ; E : thee a corsa ong i 
displayed by the services was as | Landing craft are nosed into the beach to unload men and supplies for General MacArthur's forces ' WELLINGTON, New 
marked as the special tactical ef- Associated Press Wirephoto (U. 8. Signal Corps Pes 3 Oct. 31—The Austra 
ficiency of the various branee. (ODDO ———— —?¢ . gas 4 Y 4 a 
The ground troops have shown a | i : - . " a PS ae OR 
tenacity of purpose which has car- | Surgeons Get Live Shell a a ; a ee 
ried them unflinchingly through | , : , : : noon ‘ by Francis M. Forde, I 
every ordeal The tactical skill Out of Doughboy’s Chest : ‘ aii » si Minister and Army M 
with which the troops have been | ; ¥. ae ; arrival for Austr 
maneuvered has not only out- | “a j ; ge ; e ‘ 
witted the enemy but has resulted By The Associated Press 4 ’ * f F i 3 ; 7 . land conversatior 
in a relatively low casualty rate WITH AN AMERICAN HOS- | j — j hu ! The Australians 
that is unsurpassed in the history PITAL UNIT, on Leyte, Oct. 31 , ; Ge : the brunt of the 
of war Army surgeons here have re- ’ i f: ; : Pacific offen 
navel Menges has written his =o ' . . . -.. ae ; 
name high in the annals of gen- | Moved from a doughboy’s chest : j bee = se “4 of the battle 
alship. The Navy components a live artillery shell that might a : gern , . oe rest and reinf 
operating under my command | have exploded and killed sur- ‘ ° . 3 said, citing new 
te are o~ = — geons, attendants and patient < : , ‘ : ordeal to wh 
Ovaity to a ommander Nn ief - . m 
Seaurn fone anathas branch. tut = hardy Yank probably will be +f cs : ae “ , cosa aioe 
have exhibited an elasticity in aoe A | 4 . ; £ For a 
tactical proble ms and that grim An X-ray showed the small- —" 3 : ; ' 3 , = ea 1 been preoccupiec 


unflinching courage in combat caliber shell had entered above 
which have so characterized our the hip and lodged against the a ‘ , : i .s ; ; , ¢ 
Navy from its very origin ribs. The cap, or fuse, still was . et ‘ , : 4 ’ Japanese ! 

The Australian squadron con- in place : “— 2s ‘ R ’ : Z ' : southwestern 
ducted itself in accordance with An ordnance expert told the i Z vam ; “he f , d said. “For 
the highest tradition of the Brit- surgeons the shell might explode | : | ‘ . Be ' $ been heard of 
ish Commonwealth of Nations if it were struck sharply, but j , . . i ¢ . | dier in the fiel 

Admiral Kinkaid has shown that it could be removed by - ‘ - : . . ; a indicate os hg ve 
himself to be one of the great na- small forceps with great care. | , cian * . ¥ : j ms * ™ » effort.” h 
val leade i of our day Maj. Charles Appleberry of ; . — [= 1 om y Some . tense | 

rhe air forces assigned to me Platte River, Mo., assisted by : . ae . “ t parati 
both land and sea have fought . 7 1 . : " /., cal preperark 

srg Be : Capts. Nathaniel Cohen and : ' ' 4s > tensive 
with a ferocity and intelligence es , er ‘ Pan ’ $ and extensi\ 
never surpassed even by the bril- K. K. Johlman of Gardner, Mass., ' 4 sf - ih , “Merely to 
liant performance of this branch made a long incision down the : ; ps ae. ‘ # oi 3 casualties is to pr 
of the service in the present wat wounded soldier's chest and . : 4 be ¢ ota. if plete and misleadi 
General Kenny and Admiral stomach, | 2 > on k . ' : - price we have 
Sprague have confirmed their With steady hands Major Ap- | ip r : im \ ie emee oe , victories the W 
high place in the annals of their pleberry grasped the shell in the ‘ m ; . , tinued. “The tota 
land forceps and lifted it to a tray. ; of %: 4 ; ‘ ; “ Si is oO ee - f Australian fighti: 

I am deeply grateful to the cov- Ordnance men disposed of it. a % ’ i » % ; : , zy r <3 * Lh ‘ ow ft 30. 1944. were & 
atram Gircma Of the Third Vineet | eqs Te a s ‘ it ae sa Sgt Fe epi ea iii - 5 » sage 1 s B29 kil a 976 n 
for their brilliant and successful : : 7 aan 4 : . > ain £ : Bet cee ad eu ee ae — : — an — 7 4 
advance forays and for their pushing northward up the central peg Pi, Pe: 8 . ; | . vee . a But mene sy A ats 
timely intervention at a critical | valley of Leyte, last night reached |* a oi = Sgt. Howard Preuse, New York City, leads youngsters to safety i seaie aa ee ne 
Stent Gulkietiinn’ the faissel Iandinn, a point eight miles from the west| General MacArthur with a group of natives after the Japanese were ousted from their village Associated Press Wirephoto (U.S. Signal Corp 1400 000 soldier 

: A ; |coast of the island on Carigara| Associated Press Wirephoto Je eae ee eS raat oe i sige proportion of the t 

. taal ~ the cost of our 


To the Philippine people, civil ; —_— — ———————” . : — . — = : 
Bay, where detachments of the| Britain Gets Back U. S. Base | Plaque at its base commemorates 
|arrangements made on the site for|of malaria and 


populace as well as guerrillas, led |—*- ‘ ‘ 
ay Syne Gumena, 5 wish ¢e en Vag a gnc FS opted — up the Leyte Valley supports in| STILWELL IS CRITICIZED Filipino Home Guard Ordered CHELTENHAM, England, Oct. 
express my deep appreciation for | the north, foug we 2 lee sa : the rear opped 1 isolated | ‘ *t 31 (P the arrival of hundreds of thou-| eases despite the 
their complete cooperation and |battle with reinforced Japanese moppt Ip a SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 31 31 (PA huge supply headquar-| .. 4. of American troop ante y eS 
: ‘ - os : . = varties of enemy troops, left be-/ A Filipino Home Guard in “every | : , s a : - @ | Sands of American troops vance of Austra 
help to our cause both before and | defenders I : Ps, anada’s Envoy to China Says) I ; ‘ ;| ters, occupied by the United States) — 
hy mle gee ygey Meanwhile the first umit of/hind in suicide stands on Catmon| He Can't ‘Get Along’ With Others| Province and chartered city of) sy since July, 1942, today be-|, 
oyal staff, I thank ther ‘my ‘SeS “ice ‘Is ; the Philippines has been ordered| , 
yal sta 1an n |Army nurses, American girls,|Hill and around the village of; ‘ + bop om Arno 
f their unfailing de any: of } pees ad ths | VANCOUVER C by the puppet President, José P.| Came the first large installation 
Ben nw ee ne wig y pew — _ a Dagami At Dagami more than ANCOT v ER, ( anada, Oct. 31 Laurel, the Japanese-controlled ra-| assigned to Americans in England 
erplexity and suspense when “ms caer ~- ae } ay e we r 1,000 Japanese, dug into a system P)—Maj. Gen. Victor W, Odlum, dio said today. The organization] to be turned back to the British 
flinchingly gave me of nilitar seam tals al ogy tat of concrete bunkers and block-|Canadian Ambassador to China,| will act as an auxiliary police! The ceremony was attended by 
Pi y nos t , pa eaday esti - : 
’ lished , n I poy Fiftee: of tl on houses, were wiped out by infantry|said today that the recall of Gen.| force to assist the Philippine con-| many high ranking officers of the 
We have our holds now and T nse over pt A na tontad ite “ mn units using flame throwers and Joseph W. Stilwell from his com- stabulary and other law-enforce-| British and American armies. A| 
until welt ort. tant eats Pe cs 7 cm _|supported by tanks. American|mands in the Asiatic area “will un-| ment agencies. | flagpole with an inscribed bronze 
sts ppc bo on m"| troops held the high — on | doubtedly ease the situation in the 


disappearance fror 





iy with tne 


| troret 


shall not relax the grip 

Bataan and Corregidor once more 

rise t ife Imightv G |pleted one c s ss Vin “ 0 

rise to life. Almighty God has |pleted one of his harassing nightly|Gatmon Hill and the m pping up|Far East. 

blessed our arms j}air raids (pate oF i hs - | , nes 
|was nearly completed, Gen. Doug-| He said the general is a “first- 


They landed at a pier where 
s Mac aid. |c 
LEYTE DRIVE CONTINUES lday and night, men are unload- las MacArthur's COMMER said | lass fighting soldier but he hasn't/ + y 
ling Liberty ships and small craft. | Pre Plage south a Me pp an et Pyne o get — eo - a: in o- a 
Seventh Division Troops A ht attacks were repulsed and infil-|me such as has been shown by fe! 
+" oops Are Eig dally pumping thousands of tons trating groups of the enemy were |Gen. Douglas MacArthur and Gen, 


) 
Miles From West Coast poly. aya nena Japanese | mopped up. ‘Dwight D. Eisenhower. 
By LINDESAY PARROTT |plane, making another try to at-| 
By Wireless to Tue New Yorx Times k an airstrip, had just been} 
ADV ANCE DH EADQU ARTERS, |shot down and the sky flamed with 
on Leyte, Wednesday, Nov. 1 blazing gasoline. } 
Troops of the Seventh Division, | As the Seventh Division moved} 
are : nossa sesnsenn ee ee i ae DIAMOND WRIST WATCH $3400 
is $ GOLD, SAPPHIRE AND DIAMOND 
WATCH BRACELET 495 


Jaeckel ‘, GOLD WRIST WATCH 85 
’ PRICES INCLUDE 20% FEDERAL TAX 


THE ILLUSTRATIONS AND PRICES ARE TYPICAL OF OUR LARGE AND 


or TH AP Creates... pos ' 
ZL Kies STOCK, BUT SPECIFIC ARTICLES MAY NOT BE AVAILABLE AT ALL T 


siswest| | d Md TIFFANY & (0 


Exciting Values 





_FLrti AV AVENUE & 07 STREET, NEW YOR 


ina 
New Collection of 


WOOL JERSEY 
DRESSES 
Furs to fit 


ame |) ae 29.95 


Figure | *f> 
| | “TWIN JABOTS” 


twinkling with little metal 


buttons . . . the waistline Tier on tier 


W hat a good idea eee : a whittled with dart clusters F ; 
Young furs in junior Z Aquamarine or coral $29.95 } d , i ew personal possessions are quite 
new tall look dress so truly yours as a D’Andrea made to 


proportion shorter = 
in waist and skirt, & New add-to-your- measure suit. Style is interpreted in 


At this budget- pleasing price, these lithe, young | height effect for a woman. the light of your own personality. 

Scrupulous care in fitting gives such 
becoming ease that your suit seems 
part and parcel of yourself. 


t 
I 
& 








slim hipped. The sable 
blended muskrat shown § dresses are a “must” for every winter wardrobe 


here, sizes 9 to 15, 298* : + « » town or country. One- and two-piece styles 
Also in sizes 12 to 18. : sparkling in jewel-tone shades. Sizes 10 to 18. 


Done with scalloped tiers that 

go up and up toa crushy shoulder 

Young Smart Shop | bow Wonderful dress for afternoons 
Sesuad Fleer a k | | out, eveningsin with jewels Black, gold, 1 

oes Sa eee aecé Cy, 10 EAST 57th STREET magenta rayon crepe. 36 to 44 sizes, 75.00 ) Ondrea. 

N°S TAILORS 


day-Thorpe 24 WEST 57 STREET : . 17 West SOth Street © 630 Fifth Avenue 
FIFTH AVENUE AT FIFTY-SIXTH STREET NEW YORK 22 amet OGCKEPELLER CENTER 


A 





Mason H. F. Jaecxen » Wauren F. Jancxet e Tracy Japcxen e Munnay Jarceet ; 
Dress Salon, Sixth Floor 





4 


77 


BY CHIANG ON WAR 


Continued From Page 1 | 


Continued Support of Regime 
Given as Price of Promise 
to Intensify Fighting 


TURNABOUT LAID TO KUNG 


| 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, Ww EUNLOWVAY, Nuvesbek 1, 194. 


ULSFORCED PLEDGE [Stiwell-Chiang Rift Traced 


lt to Personalities 


————— 


| By Rooseve 


| approval of Gen. George C. Mar-| 


jshall, Army Chief of Staff, Presi- 
dent Roosevelt said, and will re- 
iceive another command of equal 
importance and commensurate 
with his rank. He did not say what 
this command would be but he 
praised General Stilwell as one 
who had done extremely well in 
|China and of whom he personally 
was very fond. The General is en! 
route to this country, he said. 
In response to many questions 


Finance Minister Denies Here | seeking to elicit details, President 


He Advised Chinese Leader 
Roosevelt Eased Terms 


Roosevelt insisted that the recall, 
|did not involve questions of strat-| 3 
legy, nor was it connected with the| ag 
jmission of Maj. Gen. Patrick J.| Se 


'Hurley and Donald M. Nelson to| 


The following dispatches by As- 


sociated Press correspondents ent ae, is still in China, he added. | 


amplifying evidence of the situa- 


|China. While Mr. Nelson has re-| 
jturned to this country, General! 


The President indicated also that 


that if he had turned over to Gen-| 
eral Chennault all the capacity of | 
the “hump” airline, General Chen-| 
jnault’s air force could have kept; 
ithe Japanese from advanced Amer- 
‘ican bases in central China, which 


Japanese Told of ‘Unfavorable’ Status; 
Premier Says Materiel Lack Forces Retrea 


t 


NEW BRITISH SECURITY | 95% of Men in Service 
REPLACING WAR BOND| To Get Turkey Dinner 


LONDON, Oct. 31 (?)—The sale| apres Cee 
| CHICAGO, Oct. 31 More 


* |that an air force alone cannot pro-|5 
_ |tect bases and that the weak Chi-|“on that is 


|have recently fallen to the enemy. . ; 
| Supporters of General Stilwell| J4@pan’s armed forces, fighting a 
‘and some within General Chen-|P@S8ive defense since Guadaicanal, 
\nault’s official family have argued have been forced to “withdraw 
gradually” and now face a situa- 
“regrettably unfavor- 
able to us,’ Gen. Kuniaki Koiso, 
the premier, told the Japanese peo- 
ple yesterday. 
General Koiso repeated the Jap- 
anese claims of naval victories off 


summer 


|nese performance last 
contention 


itested the Chennault 
and found it wanting. 


China in Dictator’s Grip 
By THOBURN WIANT 


Associated Press Correspondent 
LONDON, Oct. 31.—The Kuo- 
mintang régime, headed by Gen- 


jatrributed the “unfavorable” situa- 
|tion to a shortage of materials, 

| His statements, made at a mass 
lrally in Osaka and broadcast by 
eralissimo Chiang, has been—and | the Tokyo radio for domestic con- 
is—more concerned with the in-|sumption, were recorded by the 
evitable civil war against the 80,-| Federal Communications Commis- 
000,000 Chinese Communists than |sion. 

lin the struggle against Japan. Japanese “officers and men had 
After nearly two years in the ‘to die for their nation because we 
|China-Burma-India theatre as a/‘did not send them sufficient ma- 
war correspondent, I am convinced |terial,"”’ General Koiso said, in urg- 
the Generalissimo and his party|ing greater productive effort. The 
leaders are primarily—and mostly|broadcast quoted him as saying 


|Formosa and the Philippines and) 


|Japan faced a “critical situation in 
ithe withdrawal of our forces from 
|Guadalcanal.” 

“Ever since that time,” he said, 
“we have been placed in a passive 
|position. Despite the fact that the 
brilliant and dauntless fighting of 
the officers ‘and men of the incom- 
parably powerful Imperial forces 
jhas created fear in the hearts of 
the enemy and often dealt a mor- 
tal blow, the situation has been 
regrettably unfavorable for us. 

“We were forced to withdraw 
igradually and many heroes died 
lin the Southern seas as a shield 
\for the protection of their nation 
as they grit their teeth with mor- 
| tification.” 

General Koiso, in repeating pre- 
|vious propaganda claims of naval 
successes in the »attles off For- 
|moa and the Philippines, admitted 
\“we did not,win this victory easi- 


hy.” 





tion in China disclosed by Brooks’ qgifficulties over furnishing supplies 


Atkinson in THE NEW YORK TIMES | to China did not figure in the inci- 


yesterday. 


By PRESTON GROVER 
Associated Press Correspondent 
NEW DELHI, India, Oct. 31— 
The removal of Gen. Joseph W.| 
Stilwell as commander in the 


China-Burma-India theatre, it can 
be reported today, resulted from a 
combination of strategy and di- 
plomacy such as could arise only 
in the Orient. 

The abrupt new shaping of the 
whole American position in this 
part of the World War front be- 
gan with the arrival in Chungking 
two months ago of Maj. Gen. Pat- 
rick J. Hurley and Donald M. Nel- 
son, both carrying vast powers de-| 
signed toa get from China solid| 
commitments for increased coop-! 
eration with the United States in| 
the war against Japan. 

The Associated Press is informed | 
that the commitments were given| 
virtually under threat of American} 
withdrawal of her support of! 
Chiang Kai-shek’s government. 

In turn, The Associated Press 
was informed under circumstances} 
leaving no doubt of its accuracy, 
a last-minute softening in the 
American attitude resulted in an| 
agreement for the withdrawal of} 
General Stilwell as supreme com- 
mander in the C-B-I theatre as a| 
face-saving and pacifying gesture| 
demanded by the Generalissimo. 








dent, although he was less defi-| 
nite on this point, taking the posi-| 
tion that he would have to know 
more about that situation before 
he would be prepared to comment 
on it. The Chinese had been dis-| 
turbed over the supply situation) 
some months ago, but since then} 
the volume of supplies had been} 
increased to more than 20,000 tons} 
a month by air, he recalled. | 


“One of Those Things” the position of the so-called Chi- 


In asserting repeatedly that the|nese Communists was not a factor 
recall involved just personalities,|in the withdrawal of General Stil- 


Mr. Roosevelt said there was no| well. 
politics in it and that, as he ; , ; 
| Wedemeyer Reaches Chungking 


phrased it, it was just one of those | 
things. CHUNGKING, China, Oct. 31 
One of General Stilwell’s posts,|(yp)—Maj. Gen. Albert C. Wede- 
he explained, was serving as Chief 2 
of Staff to Generalissimo Chiang |™*°¥°r erstvee med - ea 
Kai-shek. They had had certain|/Command of the China portion of 
fallings out quite a while ago, he|the recently divided China-Burma- 
continued, and these culminated|India theatre. He declined to com- 
the other, day when the general-|ment to the press on the recall of 
issimo asked for some one else tO/General Stilwell, explaining, “I 
be appointed to that post. Ac-} ; ae ca 
cordingly, the command held by wily —— pg te a en Wednactay 
General Stilwell was reorganized). 4 here I am.” 
and other officers were assigned to General Wedemeyer whe lived 
the command positions in the area.|;, China from 1929 So 1931, re- 
The President emphasized that) -.iveq an austere reception at the 
the Generalissimo was Chief Of| nuq-coated airfield. His arrival 
State, head of the Government and| .oincided with the approaching de- 
Commander in Chief of the Chinese/ .iiv. battle for Kweilin and the 
Army. Therefore the only thing growing threat to Liuchow. 
for us to do was to recall General | He was met at the airfield by 
Stilwell. It was just as if he had vaj. Gen. Thomas G. Hearn, who 
come to dislike some Briton sta-|was General Stilwell’s chief of staff 
tioned here, Mr. Roosevelt said, and |;,, Chungking; General Hurley, 


Clarence E. Gauss 
The New York Times, 1940 








—interested in perpetuating them- 
selves. 

Democracy does not exist in 
China, There probably is no more 
effective dictatorship than that of 
the Kuomintang. There is no free- 
}dom of speech, or of press, or of 
}much of anything else. 

There are secret police, concen- 
tration camps and firing squads 

for those who dare to speak, or 
write, or act out of turn. There| 
also are ingenious means of ap-| 
plying “do-it-or-else”’ pressure 

For years China has been on the 
verge of falling apart. 

All this may sound strange to 
Americans, who had thought the} 
Chinese had been fighting heroic 
battles against the Japanese for 
the last seven years. 

Why hasn’t the American public | 
been kept informed? First, be-| 
cause o* Chinese censorship. Sec- 
ond, because Washington held out 
hope that the mess could be cleaned 
| up Washington, through General 
| Stilwell, gave Chiang every assist- 


When T first arrived in the| pany, was not carrying out orders 
C-B-I theatre in 1942 I heard! promptly, he would walk or “jeep” 
whispers that many Chinese re-|+, the battalion or company head- 


ports were not only slanted but . 
grossly exaggerated and some-|Warters to see what was wrong. 


times downright false. Later I|He stayed until the orders were 
discovered that fact for myself. | carried out. 

Correspondents detested send-| It seemed significant then—and 
ing those reports: they did not if;}more so now—that the offensive 
they could detect the falsehoods. | usually slowed or halted when Gen- 
But they sent those that seemed|eral Stilwell had to be away. 
to have a semblance of truth. Aft- However, General Stilwell al- 
er all, the reports were official; ways contended that, properly 
and Washington still was playing! trained, equipped and led, the Chi- 
ball with Chungking. |nese could fight as well as any in 

On one occasion I asked a Chi-|the world. 
nese official why a certain com- on 
pletely erroneous report was dis-) 
tributed to correspondents for dis- Kung Calis Report Unfounded 


semination. He just smiled and) Dr. Kung, who is Chiang’s 
mumbled something about its be-| brother-in-law, made the following 
ing based upon field reports,/8tatement in New York yesterday 
American military men and writ-|to The Associated Press: 
ers always were wary of Chinese| “My attention has been called to 
field reports. |certain passages of an AP dispatch 
I replied, “Some day, when the from New Delhi published by to- 
American people !earn the truth,|?@Y's: newspapers referring to the 





j;ance possible under the circum-| 
stances. 

The mess became so bad, how- 
ever, that General Stilwell was 
finally recalled to Washington. 


Stilwell Eager to Fight 


I have just come to London after 

a leave in th. United States and 
have excellent reason to believe 
that General Stilwell was always 
eager to fight the Japanese in 
China, without delay. On the 
other hand, the Generalissimo ap- 
parently reckoned the Americans| 
| would do the job for him eventu-| 


reports such as that will backfire |e oused to have’ sent te "Gen. 
Cc C Yen- 
a ya and walked away.|°'@lissimo Chiang and the alleged 
Correspondents rarely were per-/ reports A ee aioe between 
mitted to go to u fighting | “I wish to pres a that all these 


fronts. Upon occasion they were . . 
taken on fase tours of “cold” | alleged accounts are highly mis- 


battlefields. They would be shown|!©@ding and unfounded.” 
stacks of Japanese guns, helmets ae ik ate 
and other equipment. There was|Chiang Marks Birthday Quietly 
a standing joke among American! CHUNGKING, Oct. 31 (®)\—Gen- 


of British National War Bonds will) 
be discontinued after Nov. 6 and) 
in their place will be offered a new! 
security known as the 1% per cent} 
Exchequer bond 1950, Sir John! 
Anderson, Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer, announced today. 

Sir John told the House of Com-! 
mons that the new bond was to be 
issued at par and repayable at par) 
Feb. 15, 1950. 

He said Britain’s total expendi- 
tures during five years of the war 
up to Sept. 2 were $96,000,000,000, | 
of which war services totaled! 
$80,000,000,000. 

Of the total expenditures, $44,- 
936,000,000 was raised by taxation 
and other revenue and the re- 
mainder by borrowing. The total 
national debt as of Sept. 30, he 
said, was about $84,800,000,000, an 
increase of $51,200,000,000 since 
the beginning of the war. 

“The present issue of 2%. 
cent National War Bonds 1952-54, 


on 


per | 


than 95 per cent of all the men 


and women in the armes 
including those held 
by the enemy, will have an old- 
Thanksgiving 
Nov. 23, Col. H. R. McKenzie 
the Office of the Quarterms 
General said today 

The Red Cross: has 
taken steps to get proce 
key, packed in 12-ounce cans 
prisoners of war in Germany 
way of Switzerland and to th 
held by Japan Viadi' 

Elsewhere soldiers an 
will consume 60,000,000 
of turkey, including 
drumsticks,‘ with all the trim 
mings, Colonel McKenzie said 

Butter and chocolate perfect 
by the Army so that 
melt in dl0 degree temper } 
will be included « the holiday 
menu in tropical climates 


MAKES A PIPE 


prisoners 


fashioned dinne 


. 
aater 


_ 
aireacy 


to 
by 


ssed tu 


s¢€ 


Via ladivostoK 
1 SZ 


pound 


alors 
s 
8 O00 000 


t w 


which was originally placed 
sale in September, 1943, has al- 
ready reached the total of about 
$2,760,000,000,” Sir John said. 

He said the replacement with a 
new issue was planned “in accord- 
ance with normal practice.”’ 


| WOUNDED WRITER DIES 


| 
Stanley Gunn of Fort Worth is 
2d Press Victim in Tacloban 


WELCOME ANYWHERE 


FORT WORTH, Tex., Oct. 31 UP) 

Stanley Gunn, war correspond- 
ent for The Fort Worth Star-Tele- | 
gram and The Houston Chronicle, | 
died on Monday of wounds suffered | 
in a Japanese bombing attack on| 
Tacloban in the Philippines on Oct.| 
25, Gen. Douglas MacArthur’s| 
headquarters notified his wife to- 


CUSTOM-MADE FOR THE 
CARRIAGE-TRADE SINCE 1856 


ay. 

Last Friday a message was re- 
ceived from Mr. Gunn telling Mrs 
(Gunn that he had suffered a 
ibroken leg in the bombing attack 
that took the life of Asahe! Bush. 
| Associated Press war correspond- 
jent. 
His message said he expected to 
_ home in a few weeks. Mr. Gunn, 
a native of Texas, was 30 years of| 
age. He was accredited to General} 
MacArthur's forces, and with the! 
jinvasion of the Philippines he 
landed with the fifth wave of 


correspondents that the equipment 
had been transported from one 
battlefield to another for the bene- 
fit of newsmen. One correspond- 


eralissimo Chiang Kai-shek ob-|4merican troops on Leyte. 
served his fifty-eighth birthday | Mr. Gunn received his Bachelor 
today. There was no public cele- of Journalism degree from the Uni- 


‘bration because of the war, but the/VeTsity of Texas in 1937 and 


worked on The San Antonio Light 


asked for his recall. Of course, he| president Roosevelt's personal rep-|ally and that he could hoard most/ent said he had scratched his ini-| Generalissimo received felicitations 


Story “Leaked” Through 
| . jand The Austin (Tex.) Daily Tri- 


So large are official “leaks” in 
Chungking and other Chinese po- 
“fitical and military circles that ma-| 
jor portions of the story of this| 
strange shake-up in the war} 
against Japan were known within! 
hours after the events occurred. 

As it was related to The Asso-| 
ciated Press, General Hurley and| 
Mr. Nelson explained to Generalis-| 
simo Chiang that there was much} 
disappointment over the failure of | 
the Central Government to come to| 
an agreement with the Commu-| 
nists in the North so both they and| 
the Central Government troops 
now blockading them could be! 
brought against the Japanese in| 
China. | 

Among the requests were: 
First, that Chiang reorganize his| 

Cabinet and eliminate reaction-| 

ary obstructionists and anti-for- 

eign members. 

Second, that an American general 
be placed in command of Chinese 
operations not only in Burma 
but elsewhere in major opera- 
tions against the Japanese. 
During early conversations it 

evidently was assumed on both 

sides that General Stillwell was to} 
be American commander. 

The terms: were put forcefully 
to Chiang, in some _ instances 
backed by specific messages from 
President Roosevelt. Stormy scenes 
followed. Chiang, as was expected, | 
refused to dissoive or reorganize 
his Cabinet, although he accepted 
other conditions with the tacit ad- 
mission that some of his com- 
manders on the major fighting 
fronts in central China were not 
effective. 

Then came an odd change in the 
proceedings. 

Chiang became stubborn and it 
was discovered that H. H. Kung, 
his Finance Minister, visiting in 
the United States, was telegraph- 


eas 


Foreeast... 
eold and 


wet! 


In our selection of 
coats with the famous 
Burberry name is this 
light-weight raincoat 
that is as smart as it 
is useful. Wear it 
when a cold, cloudy 
sky suggests showers. 


BURBERRY RAINCOAT 


Imported poplin, self-lined, 


ABERCROMBIE 
6 Fircu co. 


MADISON AVENUE at 45th STREET, NEW YORK 17, N.Y, 


SUPPORT THE NEW YORK WAR FUND 


added, in such an event Prime Min-| resentative: Gen. Ho Ying-chin, 
ister Churchill would withdraw the|Cpinese Minister of War. and 
officer. |Chinese Foreign Minister T,. V. 


= Soong. 
Communist Factor Disavowed | 8 


| There were no bands and no 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 (-—j/demonstrations as the plane set 


President Roosevelt said today that down.at Chungking’s airport. 

, — 
that General Stilwell must go. He 
supporting the stern position taken|cited charges. For security rea- 
by his two representatives in|sons, the nature of the charges 
Chungking. | cannot be disclosed. 


Usually well-informed sources, Charges Are Rejected 


whose reports The Associated} oe 
Press believes reliable, stated that) The Generalissimo was adamant 
and the United States representa- 


Mr. Kung telegraphed the Gen- : | 
eralissimo that Harry Hopkins had/tives were faced with capitulation 
informed him there was no cause|on this point or a break vin _the 
for alarm in the American attitude| policy of supporting Chiang’s Gov- 
and that if Chiang would hold out/ernment. A few days ago General 
determinedly he would win all| Stilwell was relieved of his com- 
points. mand and left for America. Chiang 
was specifically informed, however, 

Lenrning ot thas wpe, that the United States did not ac- 


American negotiators evidently)" oe - . 
obtained a flat statement from the|C¢Pt his charges against General 


>resi that he was| Stilwell. — : 
br ome oud Gulled the nego-| In China - Chiang evidently 
tiators at that point fully igained “face” by the maneuver, 
i "* |. __ | which is looked upon in many Chi- 
As their part in the bargaining, nese and American quarters as 
the Americans had the power to | capitulation 
withhold lend-lease onpption and to| Gomane. ta nhaedetaiet iasie 
withdraw Maj. Gen. Claire L.| , 1 
Chennault and his United States — time has been lost through 
Fourteenth Air Force from China.| 4 nerican hope of close and har- 
Finally an agreement Wa&S)monious relationship with the Chi- 
reached that included the term|nese Central Government has been 
that an American would get COM-/ greatly shaken. 
mand of Chinese field forces. It) around Chungking and at air 
was a large pill to swallow, but in|/pases there is much discussion of 
the interests of harmony Chidng)| who is to blame for the defeats in 
evidently agreed at one stage to| central China. Many Chinese com- 
take it and keep the war going at/njain that General Stilwell and the 
top speed. He agreed to give Gen-|{jnited States have failed in the 
eral Stilwell command of Chinese) delivery of adequate supplies. The 
field forces with the comment that),)q pitterness between Generals 
he would “give him my full confi-|stijwell and Chennault is @ndlessly 
dence. reviewed, 


Then, to the amazement of all) iti : oe 
the negotiators, Chiang declared| Critics of General Stilwell insist 


ing him that the President was not 





disagreements and that the 





LONGDN 


of his resources for the civil war. 

General Stilwell did everything 
humanly possible. Some un-| 
informed persons hastily inter-) 
| preted his recall as a rebuke. Now| 
| they are beginning to see that he 
| deserves not only a pat on the back 
but unique recognition for his 
long-suffering, conscientious, loyal, 
skillful service. 

Few fighters have had to absorb 
so many blows—legal and other- 
wise—as 62-year-old Uncle Joe. 
He took them like the champion he 
is, and kept slugging. 

For the last two years, and be- 
fore, American military and ci- 
vilian observers have left China 
for Washington with astonishing 
reports on conditions under the 
Generalissimo. 

Early in 1943 an observer from 
China told me: 

“I had to see it to believe it. 
Only Stilwell could keep going 
against such obstacles, political 
and otherwise.” 

He asserted that lend-lease ma- 
terials were being saved for the 
civil war; that approximately 
1,000,000 of the Generalissimo’s 
troops were in northern China,| 
watching and sparring with the 
Communists. 

He said that Chinese in many} 
sectors were resisting only on a} 
token basis; that goods were pass-| 
ing, freely in many areas, from the| 
Japanese to the Chinese and vice 
versa; that money and letters | 
could easily be sent into and out of! 
Japanese-occupied centers such as} 
Shanghai and Hong Kong; that the 
money market seemed to be 
maneuvered for the benefit of 
those in power. 

Correspondents knew all this but 
we could not write it then. 

There remained hope for’ a 
change for the better. It was hard 
to see how it could become worse. 





n« 
Lo 





RY.s | 


KNOX 
tHE FATTER 
NEW YORK 


BURBERRY 


We have just rece 


OVERCOATS 


ived from England 


a shipment of men’s Topcoats and 


Winter Overcoats 


. An early inspec- 


tion is recommended, while our stock 


of these famous 


coats is complete. 


BURBERRY TOPCOATS *75 
BURBERRY WINTER OVERCOATS 


*O5 
Col 
OXFORD, NAVY 


*100 


ore: 


- BROWN, BLUE 


Burberry Cotton Gabardine Trench coats . . $60 


$38.00 
raglan shoulders. Tan only. 


Madison Avenue at 


Broadway at Co 


RON OG the LAN ISR 


Fifth Avenue at. Fortieth Street (18) 


Forty-fifth Street (17) 
rtlandt Street (6) 


| 


tials‘on a helmet and had seen it! from all parts of the country and 
again a few months later on an-/from abroad. He arose at his ac- 
other “cold” battlefield, |customed early hour and prayed 

The Chinese in Burma fought 


well principally because Genera 
Stilwell was constantly on the spot! 
to see that they fought well. 

I spent five months in the north- 
ern Burma jungle with General 
Stilwell, walked. with him about 
150 miles and “jeeped” with him 
I don’t know how many more, Only 
infrequently—when he had to make 
an overnight flight to Chungking, 
for example—did he take his fin- 
gers from the puise of that cam- 
paign. 

When a battalion, or even a com- 


usual day’s wark. Later he went 


refused to see visitors. 


Filipino Women Lead Patrol 

WITH SEVENTH DIVISION, 
on Leyte, Oct. 31 UP)—Two Fili- 
pino women whose husbands were 
killed by the Japanese while they 
served with the Philippine guer- 
rilla forces led an American patrol 
that surrounded and killed fifteen 
enemy soldiers today. 


$a ag ay i BEST & CO. 


Give to the NEW YORK WAR FUND, 
57 William Street, New York 5, N. Y. 


\ 
New “Shirtmaker in } 


BRITISH WOOL 


Rare find 
loving British in tiny two-toned checks... 


' 
| 


soft wool made by the quality- 


Perfect fabric for a perfect classic — our 
beautifully tailored Shirtmaker fastened 
Sizes 10 to 40 


with brown or navy predominating. 


with tiny horn buttons. 


British Sportswear — Third Floor 


Mail and phone orders filled -- WIsconsin 7-5000 
Postage prepaid everywhere in the U. S. 


Best & Co. 


Fifth Ave. at 35th St., New York 18, N.Y. 


Bronxville East Orange Garden City Rye Stamford 


2__Copyright, Best & Co., Inc., 1944-———* Reg. U. S$. Pat. Off. 


and meditated before beginning his | 


to his country residence where he | 


|bune before joining The Star-Tele- 
|gram staff in 1943. 





Airplane Stamp No. 3 becomes valid today 


POLISHED CALF 


Shoes that get around 


Why calf shoes much in 


demand? Because they really wear . 


are SO 


keep their good looks . . . and respond 
so beautifully to polish. Shown are 
two favorites from Best’s collection of 
smart shoes in fine quality leathers. 


Sixth Floor 


BOW 


medium heel 


PUMP with 
Black or brown calf 
10.95 


easy-to-wear 


with rayon grosgrain bow 


with 
10.95 


SADDLE-STITCHED PUMP 
high heel. Black or brown calf 


Mail and phone orders filled — Wlsconsin 7-5000 
Postage prepaid everywhere in the U. S. 


Best & Co. 


Fifth Ave. at 35th St., New York 18, N. Y. 


East Orange Garden City 


Copyright, Best & Co., Inc., 1944 


~ 
’ 


BEST & CO.—— 


| 





Listed by Nimitz in 


CLOSE TO KWEILIN 


Two Only 6 Miles Away, One 
9 Miles Southeast—Chinese 
Advance in Yunnan 


Date Place 

Sept. 9-24—Philippines .. 

Oct. 10-16—Nansei, Shoto, 
Formosa, 
Philippines . 

17-18—Philippines .. 

22-27—Second Battle of 
Philippines . 


CHUNGKING, China, Oct. 31 
(UP)—Japanese forces, attacking 
Kweilin in three columns, have 
smashed through Chines” defenses 
to within six miles of the city, a 
Chinese High Command commu- 
niqué announced today. 

One Japanese column was re- 


ported to be engaged in “severe 


Oct. 
Oct. 


. Third Fleet... .362 


. Third Fleet... .528 
occ Ree Bee... 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER lI, 


3 JAPANESE UNITS | Four Periods of Japanese Plane Losses 


Carrier Score Sheet 


By Telephone to Tas Nsw Yorx Times. 
PEARL HARBOR, Oct. 31—Four periods of great loss for the 
Japanese were listed today by Admiral Chester W. Nimitz with 
the following score for the Navy’ 


8 carriers: 
Planes 
-Destroyed-—— Planes 
In the On Dam- 
Air Ground. aged. 


584 0 


Unit 


304 


55 31 


. Third Fleet and 
Seventh Fleet .392 


31 





fighting’ with Chinese troops six| — 
miles east of the city Another) ; 
column crossed the Kwei River|/River bridge on the Peking-Han- 
six miles northeast of the city but|kow Railway 

was “thrown back,” while a third 
column was stopped on the Kwei 
nine miles southeast of the city. 

The Chungking communiqué re- 
ported that Chinese troops, as- 
saulting the Japanese rear, con- . 
tinued 4 at Tungan, ninety) SOUTHEAST ASIA COMMAND 
miles northeast of Kweilin, cap-| HEADQUARTERS, Kandy, Cey- 
turing two strong points. The|jon, Oct. 31 (4#)—Chinese troops 
fighting in southeast Kwangsi|have consolidated their positions 
along the West River continued. |jn Myothit, twenty-four miles 

On the Yunnan front the Chinese/ northeast of Bhamo, in the new 
High Command announced local/ ajlied northern Burma campaign 
successes on the Lungling-Mang-| to clear a land route to China, Ad- 
shih part of the Burma Road/miral Lord Louis Mountbatten’s 
Chinese troops supported by Amer-|headquarters announced today. 
ican planes took a Japanese hill! To the west of Myothit, the cap- 
position two and a half mileS|ture of which was announced yes- 
southwest of Lungling. In the/terday, British troops in the rail- 
Mangshih area Chinese troop8|road corridor continued their of- 
were reported to have taken all but/fensive patrol action in the Maw- 
one of the Japanese positions sur-/ hun-Mawlu area, the daily com- 
rounding the city. |muniqué stated. 

The Chinese communiqué also | In northwestern Burma the Jap- 
announced that American planeS| anese were putting up a fierce re- 
during the past week had made|sistance around Kennedy Peak, on 
heavy attacks on Chefang, Wan- tne Tiddim-Fort White Road, the 
ting and Mangshih, all important! bu) ‘etin said. 
towns on the Burma Road. | Allied aircraft attacked road, 

Maj. Gen. Claire L. Chennault’s ra:! and river traffic in central 
headquarters announced today that; Burma and in the Chin Hills below 
bombers of the Fourteenth Air} Tiddim. 

Force and the Chinese-American | 
Composite Wing had struck a se-|Command’s Strategic Air Force 
vere blow at Japanese communica-| made a 2,000-mile round-trip Sun- 


CONSOLIDATE BURMA GAINS 


iChinese Hold Their New Line 
Northeast of Bhamo 


area near Hanoi, French Indo- 
China. Hanoi was a new target 
for the Eastern Air Command. 


COMMUNISTS HIT SPAIN 


British Paper Attacks Franco— 
Envoy Going to France 


LONDON, Oct. 31 (®) — The 
Communist Daily Worker bitterly 
attacked Generalissimo Francisco 
Franco’s government today as Ma- 
drid dispatches disclosed that Spain 
| would send a special envoy to Paris 
itomorrow to complete arrange- 
ments for formal Spanish recogni- 
tion of the French Government. 

The Daily Worker asserted that 
General Franco's regime “could not 
survive without constant backing 
from abroad.” 

The Madrid dispatch said that 
José Antonio de Sangroniz would 
go to France via Lisbon, where he 
|will talk to British and United 
| States officials. After he has com- 
pleted his Paris mission he will 
proceed to Rome to become Span- 
|ish Ambassador to Italy. He was 
Spain's special envoy to the French 
regime in Algiers. 

The first post-liberation Ambas- 
sador to France from Spain will be 





Liberators of the Eastern Air|Miguel Mateuypla, Mayor of Bar- 


celona and a cousin of the Arch- 
bishop of Toledo, Primate of Spain, 


tion lines by destroying the Yellow day night and bombed a barracks|the dispatch added. 





; ee 
ithat Japan’s communication lines 
jof our submarines—three of which 


JAPAN'S AIR LOSSES 
EXCEED HER OUTPUT ssi Philippines eval 


battle, rather than in the custom- 
ary Washington communiqué, must 
be added scores of unannounced, 
have shrunk since she has been 
victory on both land and sea. To|Pushed back so far from her once 
jextended conquests, and naturally 
|her shipping needs are somewhat 


Continued From Page 1 


this loss figure would also be added 
the totals destroyed by Gen. Doug-| pequced. 
las MacArthur's forces. | To the 825 announced victories 
The rapid increase in the rate of| probably sunk and damaged ships, 
destruction keeps pace with our/and also the toll that British sub- 
comeback in the Pacific. From|marines, now operating fairly ex- 
August, 1943, to April of this year —-s 
the total number of enemy planes 
destroyed in all Pacific theatres| 
and by all means averaged between | 
500 and 700 a month 
Combined figures for later pe-| 
riods are not available, but the toll) 
began to mount like a bursting| 
thermomenter in June, when nearly | 
1,400 planes were destroyed in the! 
Marianas campaign and in the first 
battle of the Philippine Sea. Add 
this single month’s score to that 
of September and October and the 
astonishing total is nearly 4,000 
planes, 1,000 planes higher than} 
that made public by the Admiral! 
himself in a Navy Day speech,| 
when he said the score in the last! 
five months was more than 3,000.) 


Wonderfully soft ... 
Wonderfully warm... 


Wool 
3995 


Toll of Shipping Heavy 


Today’s communiqué did not list 
accumulated damage done to 
enemy ships in the same period, 
but the score is equally high and 
crippling to future enemy opera-| 
tions. In the two months the enemy | 
has lost- throughout the Pacific a| 
total of 653 ships sunk, probably 
sunk or damaged: 271 are listed 
as definitely sunk and fifty-six as 
probably sunk 

These figures do not include 
small craft, for which the total is| 
140 definitely sunk and a total of! 
385 sunk, probably sunk and dam- 
aged 

The admiral announced that} 
Liberators of the Seventh Army} , $j 
Air Force bombed shipping in Chi-} Paaquenny simple ie 
chi Jima Harbor in the Bonin| with an air of hushed 
Islands on Oct. 28 and other flights| 
of the bombers hit barges at Haha! 
Jima the same day. Search planes| 
of Fleet Air Wing 1 carried out} 
strafing and bombing attacks - 
five small cargo ships at Kita Iwo 
Jima in the Volcano group. One of | 
the ships was sunk, one badly dam-| 
aged and one was left afire. 

Kita in Japanese means in the} 
direction north, and Iwo means 
sulphur. Jima means island. We! 
have struck Iwo Jima itself many! 
times in previous raids, but not the! 


MISSES’ DRESS SALON 


second floor 


|were reported by Admiral Chester 


742 FIFTH AVE., AT S7rh ST 
. — + . 


| tensively in the Indian Ocean area, 
have been amassing. 


Japanese Claim 19 Warships 


yesterday that Japanese naval 
|planes had sunk or damaged nine- 
jteen American warships, including 
jnine aircraft carriers, in waters 
east of the Philippines since last 
Wednesday. 

The communiqué, broadcast to 
the United States and recorded by 
the Federal Communications Com- 
mission, said five American ships 
had been sunk, among them three 
carriers. 





A 


\ 


elegance that speaks of Good Taste. 

A dress to live in and love for its exquisite fabric—its softly, 
flattering lines. Emerald, royal purple or black—with con- 
trasting ascot of striped, rayon Surah. Sizes 10 to 20. 


"Tailored Woman 


EUGENE K. DENTON, PRES. 
. NEW YORK 19, N.Y. 





northernmost of the group. 
. 
Land-based planes are continu- 
ing to attack Rota and Pagan in 
the Marianas and Yap in the Caro- 
lines, the admiral said 


Submarines Sink 18 More 
Special to Tuz New Yorx Tres 

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—Eight- 
een more Japanese vessels have 
been sunk by United States sub- 
marines, the Navy reported today 
in a communiqué that served to 
emphasize that, while our planes 
and warships are decimating the 
enemy's battle fleet, destruction of 
Japanese merchant shipping is 
proceeding steadily 

The latest sinkings, which irf- 
creased to 825 the number of an-| 
nounced Japanese losses from our 
submarine action in the Pacific} 
and Far East, included one de-| 
stroyer and a small auxiliary war-| 
ship | 

The others were three medium| 
cargo transports, one large trans- | 
port, two small cargo transports, | 


KORET’S 


DRUM BAG 
NOW IN 
UNREAL 


TORTOISE 
SHELL 


HIS new hard-shell version (5 inches in 


Japan’s High Command claimed | 


CHINESE RED URGES 
DICTATORSHIP END 


Presses Reform of Internal 
Policy as Basis for Unity 
in War Against Japan 


A Chinese Communist spokes- 
man has sent a letter to repre- 
sentatives of the Kuomintang 
[Government party] in Chungking 
calling for dissolution of “one- 
party dictatorship” in China and 
establishment of a coalition gov- 
ernment to carry out “thorough 
military, political, economic and 
cultural reforms’ as a basis for 
united front warfare against Japan, 
the Communists’ radio said yester- 
day. 

The letter was sent by Lin Tso- 
han, who had represented the Com- 
munists in talks with the Kuomin- 
tang, to Dr. Wang Shih-chieh and 
Gen. Chiang Chi-chung, repre- 
sentatives of the Kuomintang. 

In his letter, quoted by the 
Yenan station in an English-lan- 
guage wireless dispatch to the 
United States recorded by the Fed- 
eral Communications Commission, 
Mr. Lin declared that a “grave 
crisis exists everywhere—political- 
ly, militarily, economically and cul- 
turally.” 

Declaring that “signs of disloca- 
tions exist between the Govern- 
ment and the people, Army and 
people, officers and soldiers, offi- 
cers and officers and Army and 
Army,” Mr. Lin demanded official 
recognition of the 
forces and Communist “organiza- 
tions behind the enemy lines” and 
asserted 

“At present the only way of sav- 
ing the situation is to demand that 
the National Government and 
Kuomintang immediately cease 
one-party dictatorship and for the 
present National Government and 
Kuomintang immediately to con- 
vene an emergency national con- 
ference of representatives of anti- 








Communist! 


Japanese parties and groups, of all 
anti-Japanese armies, all local 
governments and all patriotic or- 
ganizations to form a coalition 
government, and for this govern- 
ment to proclaim a new policy of 
carrying out thorough military, 
political, economic and cultural re- 
forms.” 

The Yenan leader's letter left the 
door open for future negotiations 
between the Communists and 
Chiang Kai-shek’s Kuomintang 
group. 

The letter said, “We welcome 
Chiang Kai-shek’s statement to the 
People’s Political Council that the 
problems will continue to be solvea 
through political means.” 


TO BUY 100,000 TRACTORS 


Brazil's Purchase Here to Speed 
Farm Mechanization 
Ry Wireless to Tar New Yorx Times 
RIO DE JANEIRO, Oct. 31-— 
One hundred thousand tractors 


1944. 


Rumania Opens Bar to Jews 

The Rumanian Ministry of Jus- 
tice has announced that all Jew- 
ish lawyers who were members of 
the Rumanian Bar on Sept. 15, 
1936, will be reinstated “provided 
that they can prove that they have 
practiced three years,” the Buchar- 
est radio said yesterday The 
broadcast, reported by the Federal 
Communications Commission, said 


that Jewish applicants meeting 
this requirement would be “consid- 
ered qualified without other for- 
malities.” 


S) 


usAse™ 


will be purchased from the United| 


cultural zones of Brazil, the Min- 
ister of Agriculture said today. 
The tractors will implement a 
long-range agricultural plan of 
mechanization to create mass pro- 
duction. 


Two million dollars will be spent! 


in the United States. The plan 
also includes the building of free 
and bonded warehouses at which 
farmers will be able to keep their 
products, reducing expenses and 
facilitating quick delivery to mar- 
kets. 


Lublin Mobilizes More Poles 

The Soviet - sponsored Polish 
Committee of National Liberation 
‘at Lublin has issued a decree mo- 
bilizing a large body of additional 
manpower in the liberated areas 
under its control, the Moscow radio 
|said yesterday in a broadcast re- 
ported by the Federal Communica- 
tions Commission. The measure, 
the broadcast said, would “more 
than double” the Polish forces now) 
fighting under the command of} 
Gen. Michael Rola-Zymierski be-| 
side the Red Army in Poland. 


~ 








simplicity 


States for distribution in all agri-| 


SUPER.TAILORED SLACKS IN 


HOCKANUM 
GRAY FLANNEL 


Slacks in that good gray Hockea- 
num flannel, soft and creamy- 
smooth, cut and tailored with a 
great deal of conscientiousness. 
$12.95. Pure wool slipover, $7.95 
SIZES 12 TO 20—SEVENTH FLOOR 





That important look of elegance which well-dressed 


women are seeking right 


now in Pure Wool frocks 


to wear under furs, here in a sophisticated Town Shop 


» collection, luscious in texture, 


lovely in color. This is Grisella, 


100% Wool, in colors good enough to eat... silver 


grey, Wedgwood blue, 


sunrise pink, ripe wheat, 


its bele with fake gems, in sizes 10 to 20... 89.93 
TOWN SHOP—THIRD FLOOR 


GlthoMeenue al 52nd Steel New Yorks/9 


De Pinna 











SOUTH AMERICA 


uss 
“WOMAN'S WORLD” 


NEW "WOMAN'S WORLD” COLLECTION OF 
CUFF-lUXEDO CROPPERS 
Virgin wool melton coat, clipped short so that 
you can wear it as a suit (matching skirts are #10) 
and paved with mink-dyed muskrat, $135. Same 


coat with beaver-dyed mouton at $100, or with 
black Persian lamb at $165. Women's sizes. 


FIFTH FLOOR 


Subject ¢ Tax 


to 20% Fedéral Bx 


Ae 


FAMOUS FOR FINE FURS 


DELIVERS THE SKINS FOR OUR 


DesiGN Stupio NUuTRIAS 


Sour small carro vessels. five me-| diameter) is so true to tortoise in marking 


dium cargo vessels and one me-| 
dium tanker. Tankers, which| 
carry oil for Japan’s shipping and) 
her war machine, are considered | 
particularly good prizes, since our 
forces are closing in on _ the 
enemy's supply route between the} 
plundered oil fields and the home| 
islands 


kind to precious guard 


plus 20% Federal excise 
Critical Strain on Shipping 
Announcements of sinkings by 
our submarines in recent months 
have been averaging about two a 
day. Highest naval sources assert 
unequivocally now that the strain 
on Japanese shipping is critical, | 
since there is sound reason to be- 
lieve that the enemy merchant | 
fleet is below the point considered | 
a safe minimum. 

The great losses, of course, are! 
somewhat countered by the fact e« 


ON THE PLAZA * NEW YORK 19 


BERGDORF 
GQ@DDMAN 


STH AVENUE AT S8TH STREET 


and coloring as to be scarcely detectable from the 
real. A suggested bag for fur coats since its 
hanging fashion and sleekness are extremely 


hairs. $39.75 


tax. 


One of the many wonder fal things about 
our Spectator Sportswear is the fact that ic brings 
out your personality, enhances your charm, without being 
so emphatic in itself that the wearer is overshadow ed. 
If you like the drama of simplicity and fine 
materials, y u'll like our casual clothes. Try this dress 
in yarn-dyed gray All Wool in sizes 12 to 20, ac BS.95 
SPECTATOR SPORTSWEAR—THIRD FLOOR 


Gtk Meonucel Srud Shed Ne Yorkyl9 — 
; 


*Subiert 


FIFTH AVF 


Far below the Equator, on the banks of the Rio de la Plata, the 
nutria trappers are just putting their winter gear away after the 
best catch they've known in years. Up here, in Russeks Design 
Studio workrooms, knowing fingers are taking the last few 
stitches in coats made from these wonderfully fresh, wonder- 
fully beautiful pelts. So obviously, Ais 1s the time to buy nutrial 
Our prices range from $600 to $1,000 for coats made with lavish- 
skinned sleeves and backs. Widely spaced payments arranged. 


MAIN FLOOR 


Federal Excise 7 


NUE AT 36th ST.. NEW YORK 18 « FULTON AND BRIDGE STS., BROOREY® 1 


* 





DAY ROBOT STRIKES 


{ 
; 
| 


HIT SOUTH ENGLAND 


Nazi Launching Planes Hide in 
Clouds—Hotel Wrecked, 5 
Killed in Night Attack 


By Wireless to Tus New Yorx Times 
LONDON, Oct. 31—Nazi flying} 


bombs launched from planes using 
cloud cover over the North Sea | 


shattered on southern England, in-|§ 


cluding the London area, today in| 
the first such daylight attack in| 
more than a month. Crossing the| 
coast from the northeast at several | 
points the robot bombs met so 
fierce a barrage over East Anglia 
that houses several miles inland 
shook from the guns. Several 
bombs were hit and blown up in| 
midair. 

One Luftwaffe launching plane} 
was shot down early in the day) 
by a Royal Air Force Mosquito. | 

The daylight attack followed an- | 
other of the Germans’ almost) 
nightly raids. A small hotel crowd- | 
ed with thirty-five guests was hit 
before dawn and was demolished. | 
Five bodies have so far been re-| 
covered. Only a pile of rubble and | 
bedding marked where the hotel | 
had stood. | 

At the opening of a flying bomb 
exhibition here during the day, 
Duncan Sandys, chairman of the 
flying bomb counter-measures com- 
mittee, said the Nazis’ Heinkel 111 
launching planes carried the bombs 
underneath the fuselage, not on 
top as first believed. 

The enemy launching planes | 
each carried one robot, flew only 
a few feet above the water, rare- 
ly ventured nearer than about fifty | 
miles from the British coast and 
nearly always until now had oper- 
ated during darkness, Mr. Sandys 
said. These tactics made it very 
difficult for defending pilots to} 
find and attack the launching 
planes. 


Dog Aids Rescue at Hotel 


LONDON, Oct. 31 (Reuter)—A 
specially trained British war dog} 
was brought along today to a| 
residential hotel in southern Eng- 
land that had a direct hit from a| 
Nazi flying bomb. The dog’s job 
was to try to locate women and 
children buried under the wreckage | 
of the hotel. 

The dog sniffed about for some 
seconds, then began to scratch.| 
“This is it,” shouted a rescue man, | 
and digging began again. A boy| 
of 10 was dug out uninjured but} 
suffering from shock. 


GREEN URGES ACTION 
ON THE BALFOUR PLAN 


William Green, president of the 
American Federation of Labor, de- 
clared yesterday that “there is no 
justification for any further delay 
in the rendering of a decision on 
the part of the United Nations) 
that the Balfour Declaration made} 
twenty-seven years ago, favoring} 
the establishment in Palestine of 
a national home for the Jewish 
people, must be given immediate} 


force and effect.” ;Congress. 


“Perhaps many of those who} 
have been the victims of cruel 
Nazi persecution, who have been 
murdered by the agents of the 
Nazi government, could have es-| 
caped with their lives if the 
avowed purpose of the Balfour! 
Declaration had been carried out! 
promptly,” Mr. Green said. 

Mr. Green's statement was sent} 
to the Zionist Organization of} 
America to be read at tHe Balfour} 
Day demonstration for immediate} 
action by the United Nations es- 
tablishing Palestine as a Jewish| 
commonwealth, to be held tonight 
at Carnegie Hall. 

Speakers at the meeting, to be! 
presided over by Rabbi Israel 
Goldstein, president of the Zionist 
Organization of America, will in- 
clude Senator Robert F. Wagner, | 
chairman of the American Pales-| 
tine Committee; the Rev. Dr.| 





\% 


| were apprised of the invitation is- 


\the Congress of Industrial Organ- 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 194. 


Navy Ace Downs 9 of Foe organized Europe. military losses. “at the most exposed ramparts of “Cc . 
eo * mente po P | — . | Statement said. “Confiscated Jew- 
In Battle Off Philippines peaking at a ceremony at Town/ The peoples of Europe have but} the post-war world,” declared Pro-|‘Empty Gesture’ S$ if | ial : 
Hall, marking the twenty-sixth an-|one wish “and this is to be given/|fessor J. L. Hromadka, who teaches | a _ con if Jews/\ property has not yet been re- 
m niversary of Czechoslovak inde-|a chance to remove for all time the| at Princeton University. “We shall} Are Not Aided by Allies —— The overwhelming majority 
pendence, Dr. Papanek criticized| differences in their low standard of| never be permitted to live a care-| re of Jews in Rumania suffer deeply 
the wey amount of attention/life and Germany's high,” he said.| free and complacent life,” he said.| The American Jewish Conference/from lack of food and clothing 
: given to the 100,000,000 people of| Czechoslovakia has _ sacrificed i T2lOieNSe ia and the World Jewish Congress! The two P int 
— Says Occupied Lands ne occupied countries compared to for peace as much or more than| 444 jn Army Nurses Class issued a joint statement yesterday,| that ‘oe Po pee a prone 
; + e concern expressed over the/any other nation on e » de- . 7 >, ; e oe a 
oo ene sf fate of 70,000,000 Germans. \claved, ai peer saat a by the United Ru-|sion created to supervise the e» 
Take Ove: after War The Czechoslovak Minister re-| “If the sacrifices imposed on us| ATLANTIC CITY, Oct. 31 et... - mmnere a, warn'ng| ecution of the armistice terms 
fom Tar ey ferred pointedly to the results of|at Munich were not enough to save|tificates of proficiency were pre-| that the terms of the armistice be-|4 moral obligation to insure 
ze | the Nazi occupation of Europe and/the world from the present hard|sented to 141 nurses, nine dieti-|tween the Allies and Rumania) jystice is done to the Jewis) 
a | Dr. Jan Fupanek Czechoslovak warned that deaths from torture,/ experiences of war, they were the/|tions and eight physical therapists | affecting the status of Jews in that|jation” and that “unless imn 
\Minister to the United Sistes, pro- executions and malnutrition, com-| harsh contribution Czechoslovakia|today at the school for nurses at|/country “will remain an empty|ate steps are taken by the United 
posed yesterday thet ise veoples ae nS Sree Se Sate inj had to make in order to allow time|/the Army's Thomas M. England/>e-ture unless immediate steps are| States, Great Britain and Soviet 
age , — yey the occupied countries, would leave | foi the rest of the threatened na-|General Hospital here. It was the ; R the liberati e J 
in the heart of Eurcpe upon whose : : sate ~ . : taken for their implementation |Russia, the liberation of the J« 
RecirciinatiiGielaen Sstencemiall the Germans relatively stronger! tions to prepare for war,” he said.|largest graduating class in the jin Rumania, brought about by ¢ 
reegg ro oy ee “ e biologically than the other naiicns| Czechoslovakia faces the future|/eleven months since the inception “The economic and potitical dis-| victory of the Allied armies. 
, ty PEEWANLES (0 tase OVEFlin Furope. This will be true, he} with anxiety because of her loca-|of the training school. abilities forced upon the Jews in! be nullified.” 


CZECH ASKS SHARE |" help create a stable, peaceful,| added, in spite of Germany's heavy|tion geographically par culturally | RUMANIAN PEACE SCORED | Rumania continue in effect.” the 


Special to Tus New Yorx Times 








A TN LAMENT remeron a -_ 
ver oe 


| Re MN NN ae A we 
=— eo << oo Renn __ Fe ____ —= 
} 


Comdr. David McCampbell 
Associated Preas (U.S. Navy) 

ABOARD CARRIER FLAG- 
SHIP, off Philippines, Oct. 27 (De- 
layed) (UP)—Comdr. David Mc-; 
Campbell of Los Angeies | shot 
down nine Japanese fighters plus 
two “probables” in one hour and 
thirty-five minutes of aerial bat- 
tling on Oct. 24 duririg early stages 
of the second Battle of the Philip- 
pines, it was disclosed today. 

This tremendous performance 
raised McCampbell’s individual to- 
tal in the war to thirty enemy 
planes and placed him among 
America’s top-ranking aces. He is 
now tied with Maj. Don Gentile 
of Piqua, Ohio, in second place be- 
hind Maj. Richard Bong, Poplar, 
Wis., who became the United 
States’ ace of aces last week by 
bagging his thirty-third over the 
Philippines. 

McCampbell is a Navy fighter| 
pilot and commander of an air 
group whose Hellcat squadron is 
credited with shooting down 273) 
enemy planes. 





AFL WILL NOT ATTEND 
LONDON LABOR PARLEY | 
Special to Tug New Yorxw Times. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—The| 
American Federation of Labor will} 
refuse to send ‘delegates to the) 
World Trade Union Conference to} 
be held in London on Jan. 8, it was! 
reported today following an incom-| 
plete canvass of AFL executive 
council members by President Wil-| 
liam Green. 
A majority of the fifteen mem- 


bers whose views were sought 
voted in the negative when they 


sued by the British Trade Union 
The twelve-man delegation from 


izations, which accepted the invita- 
tion, will be led by President Philip 
Murray, according to present plans. 
A preliminary meeting will be held} 
in London on Dec. 4 to discuss the} 
agenda and it is reported that Sid- 
ney Hillman and R. J. Thomas will 
represent the CIO at the earlier} 
session. 





JOSE MORAND 


and his Orchestra 


at dinner and supper, 
except Sunday 


Daniel A. Poling, Dr. Stephen S.| ; 


Wise and the Rev. Dr. Henry A.} 
Atkinson. 

Participating organizations will 
include Hadassah, the Rabbinical 
Council of America, Women’s 
League for Palestine, Jewish Na- 
tional Workers Alliance, Free Sons 
of Israel, National Federation of 
Jewish Men’s Clubs and _ the 
Palestine Foundation Fund. 


Churchill May Visit Paris Soon 

The British radio said yesterday 
that “it is rumored in well-in- 
formed Paris circles’ that British 
Prime Minister Churchill “will 
shortly be in the French capital.” 
The broadcast, beamed to France 
and recorded by the Office of War 
Information, said Mr. Churchill 
would go to Paris “primarily” for 
a “friendly visit.” 


| HOTEL ASTOR 


TIMES SQUARE 


J 


RON PERRY 


and his Orchestra 
for dancing at cocktail 
time, dinner and supper 
except Monday 


Sehick shaver clinie 


and check 


Experts will be on hand to adjust or fit Our Christmas Card Shop has stacked the cards in your favor... 
pers from old-fashioned scenes and Santas to Lanky-Lil, Little Lulu, 
your Schick shaver with new parts! We'll and a deck of Peter Hunt whimsies. Here you can make your message definitely yours . 
clean, oil, adjust at no cost to you. Dam- choose the engraving, or printing you want for the card you like best. ty * 
aged parts can be r ‘ Here are cards by the dozen, cards by the box, cards by the package, i \ 
ia ) LA. 


charges. Even a new 2-M hollow ground . ale 
cards, and cards and cards with only one thing in common . 


shearing head can be fitted for only $3. 


“up! 
P Tens of thousands of different ways to say Merry Christmas! 


eplaced at moderate 
cards by the one; sentimental, humorous, smart, old timey, new timey .. . 


at Herald Square, N. Y. C. (1 $-6000 


they're all priced Macy-low, from 4e each to 50 for 37.50. 
Stationery Department, Macy’s Street Floor. 


Drug Department, Street Floor. 


* MACY'S PRICE POLICY: We endeavor to have the prices of our merchandise reflect a six per cent saving for cash, except on price-fixed merchandise. 


> 





NAZIS NEAR BORDER IN GREECE: MODERN WARRIORS IN A CLASSICAL SETTING 


QN RUN IN GREECE 


Allies Chase Foe to Within 
7 Miles of Yugoslavia— 
Tirana Sees Liberation 


ATHENS, Oct. 31 
troops and Greek guerrillas, push- 
ing the Germans out of Greece, 
were reported within seven miles 
of the Yugoslav border today 

The Germans put up a brisk 
rearguard fight north of Kozane 
240 miles north of Athens. The 
British and Greek forces routed 
the Nazis after inflicting heavy 
casualties and advanced to Arnis- 
sa, forty miles north of Kozane 
and only seven miles south of the 
Yugoslav border. The Nazi garri- 
son at Arnissa was wiped out. 

Russian pressure in Bulgaria 
and action of Marshal Tito’s parti- 
sans in Yugoslavia forced the 
Germans to turn 
head toward Scutari, in the north- 
west corner of Albania It ap- 
peared extremely doubtful that 
many of the Germans fleeing out 
of Greece would ever reach the 
Reich 

Of some 25,000 
were garrisoned 
port of Salonika 
reported left 


Germans who 
the 


10,000 were 


n 
only 


Tirana Sees Early Liberation 


LONDON, Oct (Reuter) 
The liberation of Tirana, capital of 
Albania, is regarded as imminent 
in British and Albanian quarters 
here in close touch with develop- 
ments in Albania 

Fighting is going on between the 
Albanian Army cf National Liber- 
ation and the Germans in the sub- 
urbs of Tirana. The Germans are 
putting up stiff rear-guard resist- 
ance in order to assure the retreat 
of their troops from farther south 

The Quisling government of 
Bicaku has resigned and is re- 
ported to have fled the capital 
According to the 
trolled Budapest radio, a Quisling 
National Committee has been set 
up in the north Albanian town of 
Scutari by Father Harapi, a for- 
mer member of the Quisling re- 
gency council. 

This would confirm reports from 
Albania stating that most of south 
and central Albania has been lib- 
erated by Albanian patriots In 
fact the Partisan armies have 
scored sweeping successes during 
the past fortnight. They have lib- 
erated the towns of Koritsa, close 
to the Greek frontier; Permet in 
the valley of the Vijose River; 
Berat in the center southern 
Albania; the important port of 
Valona and Dibra (Debar). just 
across in Yugoslav Macedonia. 


3] 


of 


Valona Port Intact 


Valona was liberated on Oct. 15 
after hard fighting. The daring as- 
sault of the Twelfth Partisan 
Brigade prevented the Germans 
from destroying the port installa- 
tions 

On the same day the newly 
formed Seventeenth Brigade won 
its first important victory when it 
seized the large city of Elbasan, 
south of Tirana, held it for twen- 
ty-four hours and withdrew after 
burning down the German bar- 
racks 

The Koritsa is re- 
garded the most bril- 
liant the Partisans 
The Partisans have formed a pro- 
visional government under the 
leadership of the “Tito” of Albania, 
Enver Hoxha, who is a colonel gen- 
eral and the supreme 
of the National Liberation Army 

The Albanian Army of National 
Liberation today has some 30,000 
armed men organized into seven- 
teen brigades and several special 
battalions 

The Albanian 
close operational contact with 
Marshal Tito and British liaison 
officers are attached to the head- 
quarters of the army of Enver 
Hoxha 


ol 


liberation 


as one of 


Successes of 


Partisans are in 


U. 

“It was revealed yesterday that 
United States paratroopers have 
been operating in Greece for the 
past six months,” the British 
Broadcasting Corporation ‘Stated 
in a broadcast monitored last 
night by the National Broadcast- 
ing Company The transmission, 
beamed to Europe, did not 
any details of the American oper- 
ation 


CLAYTON TO SCRAP 
SURPLUS AIRCRAFT 


Tue Ne Yorx Times 

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—W. L 
Clayton, Surplus War Property Ad- 
ministrator, authorized today the 
salvaging and scrapping of surplus 
military aircraft which is unfit for 
commercial use, has outlived its 
military usefulness and is “serious- 
ly interfering with military opera 
tions 

Increasing numbers of fighters 
and bombers are becoming surplus 
in this country and abroad, Mr 
Clayton said,’ because they are 
either obsolete or damaged beyond 
repair. He added that the constant 
replacement of old models with 
new and improved types had been 
a primary factor in the superiority 
of United States forces in the 
air ‘ 

“No combat planes are salvaged 
or scrapped, after they are declared 
surplus, if they are considered eco- 
nomically adaptable to commercial 
purposes,” he stated 

Salvaging removes 
parts, which are put 
service by the Army 
or placed in storage 

In another report issued today 
the War Production Board said 
that 18,031 planes of all types had 
become surplus since the beginning 
of the war Those already sold 
through appropriate channels for 
surplus Government property to- 
tal 5,183 

Of the 12,848 surplus planes still 
to be sold, only 2.7 per are 
fighters and 7.7 per cent are bomb- 
ers, indicating that the volume of 
war planes being scrapped and sal- 
vaged is a small percentage of all 
surplus aircraft 

Before planes are declared sur- 
pl he Munitions Assignment 
Board, an agency of the Combined 
Chi Staff, determines that 
they have further military 
value to our own military air serv- 
ices, or to the air forces of friendly 
foreign nations.” 


S. Paratroops in Greece 


Special t Ww 


all usable 
back into 
and Navy 


rent 
cent 


of 


“no 


German-con-| 


commander | 


give | 


THE NEW YORK 


| 


(?)—British! 


westward and! 


Aegean 


§ 0°, hlllttne 


Standing on ancient columns in the Parthenon, British paratroopers watch the raising of the Greek) cessions.” 


colors after the liberation of Athens. 


FACTIONAL CHIEFS | 
“TO MEBT IN ATHENS 


Elas and Edes to Confer— 
Allies Pledge 60,000 Tons | police did very 
of Food Monthly |the surge of fury. 
| Subsequently, an 


! 
of the Unknown Soldier, was the! 


} 
demand for immediate revenge! 


setting up of “people's courts.” 
From the Hotel Grande Bretagne} 
balcony this writer saw three men| 


}not 
of mob 
proper and so 
covered there was much presump-| 
tive evidence of the guilt of those} 
punished, 


4. C. SEDGWICK 
By Wireless to New York Times 
ATHENS, Oct. 29 (Delayed) 
Gen. Stephan Seraphis, head of the 


By 
g vengeance in the 


Tue 


operational side of Elas, who is now 
in Athens, conferred with Prime 
Minister George Papandreou yes- 
terday and also saw British mili- 
tary authorities. 

It is believed that he will remain 
talks 


Greater Disorder Feared 


is lending a new edge to the po-| 
litical strife 
Premier George Papandreou can| 
find a formula to re-establish and 
stabilize the drachma and organ-! 
ize speedy distribution of relief 
supplies, further disorders appear 
almost inevitable. } 


several days so as to hold 
with Gen. Napoleon Zervas, chief 
Edes’ fighting units at present 
engaging the Germans in the vicin- 


‘ 
OL. 


ity of Yanina. 

The two heads of the rival fac- 
tions met at Allied Headquarters 
in Italy before the British entry 
into Greece and agreed to place 
themselves under the orders of 
Gen. Sir Henry Maitland Wilson in 
the common struggle, but since 
then political developments have 
created a need for further discus- 
sions to arrive at some modus 
vivendi between the factions, 
which have been fighting each 
other. 


Principal Topic Discussed 


Groups Ordered Disarmed 


ATHENS, Oct. 31 (P)—The 
Greek Government today ordered 
the disarming within twenty-four) 
hours of all resistance organiza- 
tions except the Elas and the Edes, 
part of which will be incorporated 
into the regular army. The order 
followed rioting in the center of 
Athens last night between the Elas 
and a right-wing group Known as 
“X" organization. 


Eden Leaves Capital 


British Foreign Secretary An-| 
thony Eden left Athens yesterday, 
the British radio said in a broad-| 
cast monitored last night by the| 
Federal Communications Commis-| 
|sion. With him were Gen. Sir Henry! 
Maitland Wilson, Allied com-| 
mander in the Mediterranean thea-| 

In yesterday's mass celebrations|tre, and Admiral Sir John H. D. | 
commemorating Italy's attack on|Cunningham, Allied naval com-| 
|Greece four years ago the Edes|/mander in the Mediterranean, 
declined to make an appearance in| 
force in a manifestation largely | 
monopolized by the Communists} 
and the Fam groups, who availed} 


themselves of the national holiday | 
and the presence of. British Foreign|of Foreign Secretary Anthony 
|Secretary Anthony Eden and Gen-|Eden's visit to Athens arrange- 
eral Wilson to shout party slogans|ments have been made for sending 
for hours on end 160,000 tons of food a month from 
C. P. Rodocanachi, well-known|British and American military 
novelist, who is head of the Edes|stores and Middle East stockpiles 
political committee in Athens, told|to the people of Greece. | 
the writer that the Edes’ refusal to| Enough wheat, cheese, powdered 
take part was by way of a protest |milk, medical supplies and other 
against Elas guerrillas continuing/ requirements to help meet Greece’s 
to carry arms within the city lim-|urgent needs until the return of 
its, whereas the Edes had complied |more norma! conditions will be dis- 
with the Government's request and/ patched with the approval of the) 
turned in their weapons |}combined boards in Washington. 
From now on Greece, as part of 
the arrangement, will receive dou- 
Perhaps the most insistent of|ble the amount of food hitherto 
cries reiterated during the celebra-|imported under the International | 
tion, particularly around the Tomb! Swedish-Swiss Relief Commission. 


The principal subject thus far 
discussed between General! Seraphis 
and his accompanying “political 
liaison officer Despododopoulos, 
on the one side, and the Papan- 
dreou government on the other is 
the disposition of the Elas bands 
following the total liberation of 
Greece. 


Allies Guarantee Food 


By Wireless to Tue New Yorx Times 


LONDON, Oct. 31-—As a result 





People’s Courts Demanded 





OPEN THURSDAYS UNTIL 9 


peernne : 


Surnhoude 


= 


6 
~ 
~~ 
= 
y 
N 
o 
y 
‘ 


* 


attacked by an enraged mob and|Congress passed by a 
jbeaten nearly to death while the/jority today a motion to inform the 
in| President that recognition of the 
oe restrain | resent Government of El Salva-\¢ . > , 
wag ett pier y-« Congress opens here tomorrow in 

oO ' 
investigation| sympathy. 
|showed that probably there were!sented to Congress by representa- 
more than four or five cases |tives 
city | party, 
far as can be dis-| President. 


in Greece and, unless! — 





Sale! Bulbs for spring blooming 
Giant imported English tulips 


Many varieties and colors. From the original 
Holland strain. Guaranteed to bloom. 


GIANT DARWIN TULIPS, mixed colors ' 
12 for 1.00 100 for 7.5 


GIANT COTTAGE TULIPS, mixed colors 
12 for 1.00 100 for 7.50 


HARDY GIANT DAFFODILS from Oregon. Finest 
mixed varieties 12 for $9c 100 for 5.98 


DAFFODILS, exhibition novelty mixture 
f 12 for 7F9ec 100 for 4.98 
1.00 


4 for 


100 for 


HARDY PEONIES, 3-year clumps; 
red, white, pink 
DAFFODILS and NARCISSUS, 
mixed for naturalizing 100 for 1.89 
GRAPE HYACINTHS, 
heavenly blue 50 for 1.00 1.89 
SCILLAS (wood hyacinths), 
mixed 50 for 1.59 100 for 2,98 
STAR OF BETHLEHEM. 
white, for shade 50 for 4.00 100 for 1.89 
MAYFLOWERING TULIPS, American grown, 
mixed 50 for 1.79 100 for 3.50 
MADONNA LILIES, pure white 
Each 39¢ 3 for 1.00 
GIANT BLUEBERRIES, 2-yearlold plants 
2 for 3.50 
Mail and phone orders filled on 1.01 or more, exclusive 
of tax where required. Orders outside our delivery 
area will be sent collect for shipping costs. 
Bloomingdale’s Sky Greenhouse, 7th Floor 


Lexington at 59th, New York 22, N. Y. * VO 5-5900 


—Dr 
of El Salvador to Nicaragua, re-|kidnaping of Alfonso Lopez Puma- 

|signed todey and went to Mexico)re)o, 
ATHENS, Oct. 31 (#)—Hunger|4s & protest against the present censorship, have already been re- 
regime in E] Salvador 


DNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 


ARGENTINES HOPEFUL 
OF ACCORD WITH U. S. 


By Cable to Tue New York Times 
BUENOS AIRES, Oct. 31—Ar-) 
gentine officials still express the| 
belief not only that a meeting of 
American Foreign Ministers will} 
eventually be held, but that Ar- 
gentina will succeed in solving all 
the difficulties ‘etween herself | 
land the United States. 

fhey are yarticularly anxious | 
|'to dispel any idea that the Argen- | 
tine proposal to the Pan American | 
|Union was a trap set for the 
| United States State Department or} 
lthat it contained any concealed) 
motive. They scoff at the sugges-| 
tion that the Argentine move was 
aimed at weakening Pan-American | 
solidarity and say in reply that | 
there is no such thing as solidarity | 
as long as one American Govern- 
ment is not on speaking terms with 
the rest. 

They insist that the Argentine 
{Government is sincere in its de-| 
|sive to re-establish cordial rela-| 
tions with the United States and 
|that the only way this can be 
|achieved is by frank, open discus- 
sion of the difficulties. 

Some officials of the Foreign 
Ministry are even more explicit) 
jand say that Argentina is ready to 
|go to considerable lengths to meet 
|whatever demands may be made 
by the United States. According 
to them, any country in Argen-| 
tina's position must realize that! 
it cannot ask for an international 
conference to consider its prob- 
without first making up its 
“make considerable con- 


TIMES, WE 


| 





lems 
|}mind to 


a le, tr 


. 


Criticisms such as that con- 
| tained in today’s editorial in THE 
| NEW YORK TIMES, that Argentina 
could all her international 
difficulties one stroke by call- 


The New York Times (British officia 


EL SALVADOR REGIME HIT 


solve 
at 


against collaborationists and the|Costa Rican Congress Opposes) ing an election, are met with the 


Government 
the 


statement that the 
intends to hold elections at 
earliest possible moment. 


Diplomatic Recognition 


By Cable to Tue New Yoru Times 
SAN JOSE, Costa Rica, Oct 
large 


31 
ae Colombian Congress to Meet 
By Cable to Tas New York Times 
BOGOTA, Colombia, Oct. 31— 
on with which 
pre 


looked 
motion 


accordance with a call in 
the Government said that it be- 
lieved that a complete return to 
normal conditions required the aid| 
of the Legislature. The Minister of 
Government, Alberto Lieras, said 
that he believed that the state of 
should be continued. Many 

decrees issued after the 


The 


was 


Vanguard 
elect the 


of the 
which helped 


popular 
to 


By Cable to Tar New Yorx Times 


MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Oct. 31 Siege 
Carlos A. Alfaro, Minister! special 


drastic 


the press 


including 


voked 


ranklin 
Cimon 





Definition of slender grace 


Here is slender grace defined in a 

figure moulding town wool. The lines are 
fluid and femine . .. the detailing, deftly 
simple. The combined effect is flattery 
and slim, trim elegance. Black, purple 

or grey all wool. Sizes from 10 to 20. 
24.90 


Dress Circle, Fourth Floor 


New York only 
| 


FIFTH AVE. AF 38TH ST., NEW YORK 18, N. Y. * WI. 7-9600 


L + 4 


1944. 


B. ALTMAN & CO. 


FOR THE YOUNG COLONY FIGURE 


gives you all the coutrel your slim 


young figure requires. Made eof firm 


5.50 


cotton batiste. In peach only. 


sizes 26 te 30. 


Young Colony corsets, second fleer 


_ 


IT’S AN ALTMAN COUTURIER CLASSIC 


Woot Ni cain 


just one of our collection of designer fashions. 
A easual elassie with a smooth, beautiful fit. 
Just as smart with the sleeves rolled up. In grey, 


green, gold. brown or black. Sizes 10 to 18. 


Altman sportswear fashions, third floor 


B. Altman & Co., 5th Ave. at 34th St., New York 16, N. ¥. Telephone ML, #7008 
Also at our East Orange and White Plains shops 


o~ 





sS 


dl 


LONDON, Oct. 31 (P)—The text} 


of Prime Minister Churchill’s House 


of Commons speech 

In asking for a prolongation of 
the life of this Parliament for an- 
year, I doubt very much 
whether Parliament will last 
long 


There are powerful factors of 
uncertainty which pull in the op- 
posite direction or from differ- 
ent angles. The meetings of the 
various parties composing the 
coalition are to take place shortly 
before and shortly after Christ- 
mas. 

While we cannot at all forecast 
what will occur, we certainly 
cannot exclude the possibility that 
a desire to return to the party 
system will be strongly expressed. 
On the other hand we cannot tell 

hen the war against Nazi Ger- 
many will be definitely ended or 
will fall into the guerrilla stage 

“I am confident that all organ- 
ized parties will see that busi- 
ness through to the very end. 
This wotld almost certainly be 
the view, I believe, of the great 
trade union movement, where the 
det_rmination to finish Hitlerism 
is strong and invincible. I am 
clearly of the opinion that the 
coalition of parties ought not to 
be broken before nazism is 
broken. This was the purpose for 
which we came together in the 
present National Government, and 
it is stil. the supreme purpose 
which affects the safety of the 
nation and the empire 

As I said the other day, any at- 
tempt to estimate the date when 
the war with Germany can offi 
cially be declared over can be no 
more than a guess. Political con- 
vulsion in Germany may bring it 
to a speedy end at any time, but 
against that must be set the iron 
control of German life in all its 
forms, including the Army, which 
has been established by Hitler's 
Storm Troops and secret police. 
This exceeds anything previously 
known among men. 

Therefore we cannot count upon 
any of the normal reactions of 
public opinion. From every quar- 
ter it seems that the civil popula- 
tion are plunged in a dull apathy. 
And certainly onyone who stirred 
against the police would be in- 
stantly shot or decapitated. There- 
fore I cannot place any depend- 
ence on a political uprising in 
Germany 

On military grounds it seems 
difficult to believe that the war 
can be ended before Christmas or 
even before Easter. Although, as 
I have said, many high military 
authorities with every means to 
form a correct judgment have ex- 
pressed themselves more hopeful- 
ly and although every effort has 
been made and will be made 
against the enemy, the German 
troops are fighting with the ut- 
most tenacity although cut off in 
many places and in the defense of 
positions evidently forlorn. 

They have been counter-attack- 
ing with vigor though as yet with 
out success in Holland and on the 
Moselle. A great deal of work has 
yet to be done to improve the 
ports and build up supplies and 
concentrate forward the _ ever- 
growing Allied army. 

In Italy the fighting is also of 
the most obstinate character, and 


other 
s0 





| 


| who stirred against the Police} 
| would be instantly shot or de-| 
| capitated, he added. 


the weather has broken The 
eastern front has shown that it is 
on the north and 
south flanks. Immense successes 
have rewarded the strenuous 
Russian military efforts and skill 
ful Russian and Allied diplomacy. 

The distances are, however, very 
large, and many hostile defense 
posts have to be stormed or 
turned. In all these circumstayces 
I certainly cannot predict, still 
less guarantee, the end of the 
German war before the end of the 
spring or even before we reach 
the early summer. It may come 
earlier, and no one will rejoice 
more than I if it should. 

Anyhow, I have no hesitation in 
declaring that it would be a 
wrongful act, unworthy of our 
country's fame, to break up the 
present Government instrument 
before we know where we are 
with Hitler’s Germany. Those 
who forced such a disaster, even 
thoughtlessly, would take on 
themselves a measureless respon- 
sibility, and their action would be 
fiercely resented by the nation at 
large. 

I am thankful to say that there 
are no signs of any such desire in 
any responsible quarter. Let us 
assume, however, that the Ger- 
man war ends in March, April or 
May, and that some or all the 
other parties in the coalition re- 
call their Ministers out of the Gov- 
ernment or wish to bring it to an 
end from such date. That would 
be a matter of regret both on pub 
lic and on personal grounds. But 
to a great many people it would 
not be a matter for reproach or 
bitterness between us in this Gov- 
ernment or in this house, once 
Germany has been defeated. 

We are told that there must on 
no account be what is called a 
coupon election. By that I pre- 
sume is meant an agreement be- 
tween the parties not to oppose 
each other in most of the seats 
and to form a solid front against 
those who criticize or oppose us. 

In other words, it would mean 
that the present coalition should 
go to the country and obtain from 
it a renewal of confidence I 
have no doubt they would get it; 
but there would be some who 
would say it was too easy. 

We must admit that many peo- 
ple would think this would clearly 
be an unfair way of testing opin- 
ion in the country and, in fact, it 
would be quite impossible to ob- 
tain party agreement to such a 
course, many people feeling that 
it would impede the electorate in 
expressing their free choice. 

Neither would it be seemly or 
indeed practicable, once the dis- 
solution had been announced, for 
Ministers to go all over the coun- 
try expressing the utmost dis- 
taste for each other’s views and 
practices, and yet be together in 
the Cabinet discussing as col- 
leagues all the gravest matters 
of the hour 

Nor again would it be proper 
for the Ministers, who were also 
in many cases leaders and whose 
knowledge was needed to guide 
the country, to remain silent and 
apparently indifferent to the for- 
tunes of their parties or candi- 
dates. I do not find it easy to 
escape from the weight and force 
of those arguments. The an- 
nouncement of the dissolution 


most active 





The German Army, he contin- 








HE 


necessarily 
the present 


therefore, 
close of 


would, 
mark the 
administration. 

The Conservative party have a 
majority of more than 100 above 
other parties and independents in 
the present house, and it would 
therefore fall to us to make ar- 
rangements for the _ inevitable 
general election. 

I cannot conceive that anyone 
would wish that that election 
should be held in a violent hurry 
or while we were all rejoicing to- 
gether and rendering thanks to 
God for our deliverance. There 
must be an interval. 


Moreover, we have above all 
things to be careful that practi- 
cally everybody entitled to vote 
have a fair chance to do so. This 
applies, above all, to soldiers, 
many of whom are serving at 
great distance from this country. 
Nothing would be more shameful 
or more dishonorable than to 
deny the great mass of the sol- 
diers and servicemen of the air 
and of the Navy a full opportu- 
nity of recording their votes, who 
in my opinion have more right to 
vote than anyone else in the 
whole country. 


We should be assured that noth- 
ing was done which prevented 
these men, to whom we owe al- 
most everything, from taking 
their full part in deciding the im- 
mediate future of their country. 
I cannot say that every single 
man in the remote stations could 
for certain be able to vote, but 
everything in human power will 
be done to give the fullest possi- 
ble opportunities for the exer- 
cise of the franchise by the fight- 
ing services 

It is therefore in fact not legal- 
ly possible after the new electoral 
arrangements have come _ into 
force, as they do on Dec. 1 this 
year, for polling to take place in 
less than eight weeks from the is- 
sue of writs. A minimum of six 
weeks must elapse between the is- 
sue of the writs and the nomina- 
tion of candidates alone. 

All this has been conceived with 
general measure of assent by the 
House and with the sole view of 
securing the fullest and fairest 
expression of national opinion. 
Besides all this the partial redis- 
tribution authorized by the recent 
act has to be carried through. 

A start will be made immediate- 
ly, not waiting for the end of the 
German war, but the process will 
certainly take several months. It 
may therefore be taken as certain 
that from the moment the King 
gives his assent to dissolution a 
period of between two and three 
months would be required. This 
also would be fair to the political 
parties and candidates who have 
to set about one another in the 
usual lusty manner 

Moreover in the interval there 
will undoubtedly have to be cer- 
tain financial arrangements made 
and other matters of business 
wound up 

It follows, 
events are to take the course I 
have indicated, it would seem 
that, roughly speaking, there is 
no likelihood of a general elec- 
tion from seven to nine months 
from now. Finally, it is contrary 
to precedent for governments to 


therefore, that if 


vAho-d4tu 


BROADWAY & 34TH ST., N.Y. I @ LA.4-7000 


| 
} 
| 


NEW YORK 


last 
or 


the 
tenure 
and it 


for 
be 


hold on to office until 


moment of their legal 
legally extended tenure, 
would be very unwholesome 
any practice of that kind to 
introduced 


For these de 


reasons we have 
cided not to accept any pro- 
posals or suggestions such as I! 
have seen bruited about to reduce 
the period of this bill from twelve 
months to six months. I ask to- 
day for twelve months’ prolonga- 
tion of the life of the present 
Parliament. 

The Home Secretary, who will 
be in charge of the bill, will deal 
with any points of detail which 
may arise in debate 

We therefore think we have 
given a good reason to the House 
to say that the twelve months’ 
period would be a reasonable and 
proper provision to make at the 
present time. 

On the other hand we must as- 
sume that the Japanese war will 
have to be carried on for an in- 
definite period after the destruc- 
tion of the Nazi power. Here 
again there may be the possibil- 
ity of some political upheaval in 
Japan inducing a sudden sur- 
render, but it would be very fool- 
ish to count upon this in a race 
of men of this desperate and bar- 
barous character, Its whole con- 
stitution is dominated by the 
naval and military hierarchies 
who dragged them into their mad 
aggression, 

When the whole of this Japa- 
nese problem is examined on 
military grounds alone, it would 
certainly not be prudent to as- 
sume that a shorter period than 
eighteen months after the de 
struction of Hitler would be re- 
quired for the final destruction of 
Japan's will or capacity to fight. 

This forecast must be continu- 


ally revised every few months by 
the combined Chiefs of Staff. To 


prolong the life of the existing 


Parliament by another two or 
three years would be a very seri- 
ous constitutional lapse 

Even now no one under 30 has 
ever cast a vote at a general elec- 
tion or even at a by-election, since 
the registers fell out of action at 
the begining of the war. There- 
fore it seems to me that, unless 
all the political parties resolve to 
maintain the present coalition 
until the Japanese are defeated, 
we must look to the termination 
of the war against nazidom as 


| the pointer which will fix the date 


of the general election. 

I regret the break-up of the 
present highly efficient Govern- 
ment that has waged the war with 
unsurpassed success and has 
shaped or carried out within the 
last two years a program of 
reform and social progress which 
might well have occupied the 


| whole Parliament in the ordinary 
| conditions of peace. 


In fact I may say, and I must 
be quite candid about this, that, 
having served for forty-two years 
in this House, I have never seen 
any Government to which I have 
been able to give a more loyal, 
confident and consistent support. 

But while I should regret and 
deplore the break-up of this force 
so knotted together by personal 
good-will, by the comradeship of 
great business and fighting for a 
great cause, by the sense of grow- 
ing success arising from that com- 
radeship, ‘yet I could not blame 
anyone who claimed that there 
should be an appeal to the people 
once the German peril was re 
moved. 

I have a clear view that it would 
be wrong to continue this Parlia- 





iiMibS, WEUINESUVAY, NOVEMBEK 1, 1944. 


ment beyond the period of the 
German war 

The foundation of all democracy 
is that the people have the right 
to vote. To deprive them of that 
right is to make a mockery of all 
the high-sounding phrases which 
are often used. At the bottom of 
all those phrases is a little man 
who has to waik into a little 
booth, take a pencil and make a 
little mark upon a little bit of 
paper, and no amount of rhetoric 
can possibly palliate overlooking 
that. 

The people have the right to 
choose representatives in accord- 
ance with their wishes and feel- 
ings, and I cannot think of any- 
thing more odious than for a 
Prime Minister to attempt to 
carry on with a Parliament so 
aged and attempt to grapple with 
the tremendous problems of war 
and peace and the transition from 
war to peace without being re- 
freshed by contact with the peo- 
ple or without being relieved of 
any special burdens in that re- 
spect. 

I can assure the House that in 
the absence of most earnest rep- 
resentations of the Labor and 
Liberal parties I could not re- 
frain from making a submission 
to the Crown in respect of a dis- 
solution after the German war is 
effectively and finally finished. 
I am sure this is a straightfor- 
ward, fair and _ constitutional 
method of dealing with what is in 
many ways an unprecedented 
situation. 

Meanwhile I must 
the position will not 
creasingly easy. The odor of dis 
solution is in the air, and parties 
are inclined to look at each other 
across the house with an increas- 
ing sense of impending division 
But we have to be specially care- 


confess that 
become in- 





Text of Chusdhill's Speech Forecasting That War in Europe Will Last Until Easter 


that 
vig- 


ful in such circumstances 
nothing should hamper the 
orous prosecution of the war 

That, I am sure, is the resolve 
of all parties and also of most of 
those individuals who are espe- 
cially eager to bring the coalition 
to an end. I thought it right to 
touch upon these matters because 
they are, after all, of very con- 
siderable importance to our con- 
stitutional procedure 

But “urther than this I find it 
impossible to ferm an opinion 
Jorrocks said of fox hunting that 
it was the image of war without 
its guilt and with half per cent 
of the danger. Something like 
this might be said of a general 
election. 

It is a trial of strength between 
parties, of which the nation is 
the arbiter. I have often thought 
it was unwise of generals to try 
to foresee with exactness what 
would happen after a battle had 
been fought. A battle hangs like 
a curtain across the future, but 
once that curtain has been raised 
or rent, we can all see how the 
scenery is arranged, what actors 
are left upon the stage and how 
they appear to be related to one 
another. In this case it will cer- 
tainly be much better to wait 
until the new situation is fully 
discussed. 

Meanwhile, as we probably have 
a good many months of the 
closest comradeship and of the 
hardest work before us, and as 
ample opportunity for party ora 
tory will arise and necessarily be 
given between the dissolution and 
the pol! I should deprecate 
strongly the over-emphasis of 
party differences just now and 
recommend that we should all 
bend ourselves with unflagging 
energy and unbroken unity to the 
common task 


RNOLD CONSTABLE 


ROCHELLE * HEMPSTEAD * OPEN THURSDAYS ‘TIL § 


FIFTH AVENUE + NEW 


T’S A WONDERFUL FEELING 


«+. this richness in fashion. Everything that was ever magnificent is reasserted for 


today’s new elegance. Skyrocketed colours from the Renaissance, jeweled, gold- 


scrolled designs. 


Victorian sweetness in crystal dew ~-drops, Wilsonian glittering 


bugle -beads. Fairy-tale splendour of all the ages... come magically true again. 


ARNOLD CONSTABLE 


) 


Lf) 


oS, 
ABY. 


WVOTHER AND 
DOING FINE AT 


ARNOLD CONSTABLE 


Hand-crocheted cap, sacque 
and bootie set. All virgin 
iu ool warm in pink, blue 
or white with contrasting 


Infants 


3.98 


pastel frimming. 


Second Floor. 


NAZI FIGHT INTO 45 
SBEN BY CHURCHILL >see 


|success, in the Netherlands and on | 
the Moselle, and much work had 
that the war against Germany|to be done to improve the ports, | 
would be pressed to a close, Mr.|build up supplies and concentrate 
Churchill said he would strongly|forward the ever-growing Allied 
deprecate any overemphasis of|Army. 


party differences now. | In Italy, he said, the fighting| 
weather 


|was obstinate and the 
| bad 
In the east, despite Soviet suc-| 


cesses on the north and south} 





Continued From Page 1 


Wins 12 Months’ Extension 


Mr. Churchill’s bill to extend the 
life of the present Parliament for! tanks, the distances were large. | 
twelve months received second! “J certainly cannot predict, still] 
reading without a division. 


But|less guarantee, the end of the Ger-| 
Arthur Greenwood, one of the La- 


|man war before the end of the 
bor party leaders, commented that DON’T DELAY 


spring or even before we reach the 
Mr. Churchill had become Hex. | Carly summer,” he declared, 

traordinarily timorous about con-/ 

Have your Christmas gift 


troversy since he has been Prime} 
Minister.” He pointed out that iM) winister Churchill today frankly 

pictures taken NOW 
before the rush. 


the coming months there would be} gqmitted that “many high military 

post-war legislation of a contro-|authorities with every means to 

versial nature and said he did not/judge” were more hopeful than he 

think the Prime Minister should/0 the end of the war with Ger- 

oa : . .{many; as for Japan, he said his 
complain if there was a healthy forecast “‘must be revised every 
controversy over it. |few months by the combined chiefs x 
Mr. Churchill said im-|of staffs.” 

possible to tell when the war} as radi Our photographer 

against Nazi Germany would be|Lt. Col. R. P. Davidson Promoted knows just how to 
catch your best ex- 
pressions. No appoint- 

ment is needed. 

3 for 5.95 

SAKS-34TH 

Photo Studio 


definitely ended or fall into the} Special to THE NEw Yorx TImEs 
SECOND FLOOR 


Admits Others More Hopeful 
LONDON, Oct. 31 ()—Prime 





it was 


guerrilla stage. Against a speedy|, ee es Oct. 31—The 
ys —,_. - \temporary promotion to colonel of | 
end through political convulsion |y ieyt Col. Richard P. Davidson of | 
must be set the iron control of|Cooperstown, N. Y., was announced 
German life in all its forms, in-|today by the War Department. 
cluding the army of Storm Troops| Also advanced from major to lieu- 
and secret police, exceeding every-|tenant colonel were the following: 
thing previously known among|Edmund N. Gorman of 32 East 
men, he said. Seventy-sixth Street and Robert 
The civilian population seemed|M. Estes of 121 East Eighty-eighth 
apathetic, and certainly anyone/Street, New York. 








tiga AREER RE Es, 


aR? FS 


CB90H 
e 


left to right: 


RENAISSANCE PORTRAIT ... . jewel encrusted 
cuffs. Purple and black with fuchsia cuffs. Brown 


with tangerine. Black with turquoise. 


VICTORIAN DEW DROPS .,., Carolyn’s modern 
dress, sprinkled with nostalgic sweetness. Black, 


gold, fuchsia, 


EMPIRE PERIOD .... collar glossed in bugle- 


Christmas Card Shop, Street Floor 
59.98 


York 18 * WI. 7-9600 beads. High-bosomed top in white, black below. 
Fifth Ave. at 38th St., New Yor ¢ WI. 7-966 


ALL FINE-TEXTURED RAYON CREPE MISSES’ SIZES FASHION SALON, THIRD FLOOR 


Also Greenwich, East Orange, Cleveland 





MONARCHY OF LEFT 
SEEN BY HUMBERT 


First Lieut. Albert J. Tepperman, 


Continued From Page 1 iformerly an assistant purchasing 





it was easier.” the Prince said,|4nd contract officer at the New) 


“and it is always gratifying how) York Port of Embarkation, testi- 


well liked they are by the Italian fied yesterday at the general court- 
people, but then.they move on and|Mmartial of Capt. Joseph (Joe) 


: |Gould at the Army base in Brook- 
the people get little help. Still, I) that a contract for 3,000 life 


cannot tell you how much Italy | Floats, involving $570,000, was 
and, of course, myself appreciate|awarded without competitive bid- 
all the things which your President|ding and against his recommenda- 
and peoples are doing for us in tion to the Cornwall Shipbuilding 
these days.” wa meen 8 yr bene 4 2 1 
: aptain Gould, e -year-o 
Our talk touched on many of the| rormer manager of ex-heavyweight 
vast problems facing Italy during | champion James J. Braddock, is 
the difficult reconstruction period! accused of accepting $18,000 for 
ahead. It has seemed to me, when-| purportedly influencing contract 
ever I have discussed the mon-| #wards to the Cornwall concern. 
archy in Italy, that the question of}, Asked by Maj. <s00rge E. Zopf, 
. aw member of the court, what 


time is a vital — and I got that was unusual in respect to the let- 
ee oo aa Prince | Un8 of the contract for the 3,000 
Humbert may not be quoted ai- | Uf floats, Lieutenant Tepperman 
rectly, and, anyway, this was an 
audience, Rot an mnterview. What | thousands of soldiers and prison- 
is written here is my own inter-/org stilt outside Italy and it is 
pretation of the position of the|¢.i+ that they have a right to ex- 
monarchy after having talked to press their feelings too. 
the Prince. | The prince, as I see it, believes 
I remarked that everything that that, if there is a plebiscite, it 
I had heard pointed to republican | should represent a straight choice 
sentiments being even stronger in|of republic or monarchy. Then 
the north than in the ‘iverated|there would be a constituent as- 
zone and that if a solution of the|sembly to decide the exact 
institutional question were sought) that ‘the republic or 
immediately the result might be 
unfavorable. The Prince, without|/be constituted and elected 
saying anything in agreement,|whether there would be one or two 
gave the impression that there|chambers. What will mean most 
might well be a distinction be-|will be a new Constitution, and 
tween the political parties whose|that will obviously take months 
attitude has been made clear and/to draw. 
popular sentiment, which is still I brought up the delicate but 
unknown. There has been a long|important question of the statute 
controversy in Italy between those|of Prince Humbert’s great-grand- 
who want a plebiscite and those!father, Carlo Alberto, formulated 
who want a constituent assembly|in 1848. It has been Italy’s Con- 
charged with deciding on the in-|Stitution and there has been much 


stitutional form of the State. | discussion whether it should sur- 
vive or an entirely new Constitu- 


tion should be drawn. As I under- 


Monarchists for Plebiscite 


In general, the monarchist solu- 
tion would be to have a plebiscite 
in accordance with the principles 
of the Atlantic Charter. This is 
what they want and they want it 
to take place not while the coun- 


like to see the statute serve as 
|the basis for a radically revised 
Constitution. He considers it partly 
outdated and used to say so frankly 
in the past, incidentally leading to 


form | 
monarchy | 
| would take, how Parliament would! 
and | 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


Witness Tells of $570,000 Contract Awar 
_ At Army Court Martial of Capt. Joe Gould 


said no bids were sent out, nor 
were efforts made to comb the 
market for production facilities. 
|He testified that the Cornwall com- 
pany had never made floats before 
and asserted that in this quantity 
and size the contract could have 
been broken up among several 
companies to the best interest of 
the Government. 

Testimony was given that Milton 
A. Henry, president of the Corn- 
wall concern, attended two dinners 
at which Army officers were pres- 
ent. He is accused by Capt. David 
O. Kuh, trial judge advocate, of 
| being a “co-conspirator” with Cap- 
tain Gould. 

Both Lieutenant Tepperman and 
First Lieut. Jerome Richards, an 
jassistant purchasing and contract 
|officer, said that Captain Gould 
was not in a position to pass upon 
contracts let by the New York 
'Port of Embarkation. 








| 

jized and still others that should be 
dropped. The King, I gathered, 
|should use his powers to guarantee 
that the Government, in the Lin- 
jcolnesque sense, would be of the 
people, for the people and by the 
| people. 


| Realistic About Other Nations 
For some time the discussion 


\I found the Prince both well in- 
|formed and keenly interested. He 
especially wanted to know what 
Americans in general and Wash- 
ington particularly thought about 
Italy and what the American 
policy was. My somewhat pessi- 
mistic replies did not appear to 
|surprise him. In the discussion of 
|Russia the talk naturally came 
|back to Italy and her now strong 
{Communist party. The Prince 
\spoke pleasantly about commu- 
|nism, socialism and Italy and 





jopinion of men whom I have 
known since the Spanish civil war, 
such as Palmiro Togliatti and 
Pietro Nenni. 


turned to foreign affairs, in which | 


whether some types of support 
might not be more embarrassing 
than useful. I pointed to Presi- 
dent Roosevelt’s recent repudiation 
of Communist support in the elec- 
tion. Prince Humbert would not 
commit himself on that question, 
but he gave me the definite im- 
pression that he agreed that one 
of the monarchy’s chief dangers 
was that certain elements linked to 
fascism felt that they must rally 
to the monarchy for safety. He 
certainly does not want that, from 
what I understood. 

Prince Humbert fully realizes 
that the weight of the past is the 
monarchy’s greatest handicap. 
What he and his best followers 
want is to demonstrate that in 
the future Italy can be just as 
democratic under the monarchy as 
under a republic. He feels that 
many people are beginning to 
realize that and this sentiment, I 
gathered, will soon take a political 
trend. However, the Prince does 
not believe that the monarchist 
question should take the form of 
political parties. He considers his 
position to be above political par- 
ties and does not want to see a 
monarchist party and a republican 
party fighting each other. 


Wants Masses Educated 


On the general subject of con- 
stitutional and institutional ques- 


tions, I sensed a feeling that, un-| 


der the present distressing circum- 
stances, the people have not had a 
chance to think deeply or to place 
these matters in the home front of 
their pre-occupations. Prince Hum- 
bert, like other Italian leaders, 





sees an urgent need for educating 
the masses along political lines. 
He talked frankly of the diffi- 
culties that the monarchists are 
having in presenting their case. 
There is only one monarchist news- 
paper in Rome. During the Allies’ 
occupation there still is not full 
freedom of publication since every 
newspaper or magazine must have 
the Allies’ consent in advance. 
Prince Humbert appeared to me to 
be somewhat critical of the policy 


publications. 
The Prince bases his fundamen- 
tal stand on the general principle 


He has had a num-|that the form of government does 
ber of talks with Signor Togliatti,;not affect the problem of democ-| Switzerland 


talk was that he considered it ob- 
vious that, in the future, any Ital- 
ian Government must move far to- 
ward the left, and there was no 
reason why that should conflict to 
the slightest degree with the mon- 
larchic institution. In fact, he gave 
the impression that he wanted to 
see it happen and would do every- 
thing that he could to bring it 
about in what he called an ordered, 
liberal way. 

It will be a natural development, 
in his opinion. All political parties 
will have programs that will be 
socially very advanced and the 
monarchy will move with them. 
Prince Humbert’s goal, I gathered, 
is a liberal, democratic monarchy 
(qualitatively like those of Eng- 
land, Sweden, Norway and Den- 
mark) that might be called a mon- 
archy of the left. 

I found that on the subject of 
the purge the Prince had thought 
seriously and keenly. He has no 
illusions about the unhappy period 
jahead or the difficulties that the 
|House of Savoy faces in keeping 
labove water during the stormy 
|months of reconstruction. But cer- 
|tainly there was a clear impression 
lof a man who has a program of 
what he is fighting for. On the 
basis of this audience, the republic- 
ans would appear to have a foe 
who is stronger than they realize. 
Whether he wins or loses, it is go- 
ing to be a fight. 
| Coast Navy Yards Seek 1,275 

New York has been asked to 
supply a quota of 1,275 men im- 
mediately for the West Coast 
Navy Yards at Puget Sound, Mare 
|Island and Hunters Point, the War 
Manpower Commission announced 
yesterday. Volunteers are being 
hired at the shipbuilding trades of- 
fices of the United States Employ- 
ment Service of the WMC at 165 
Joralemon Street, Brooklyn; 25 
Hyatt Street, St. George, S. L., and 
278 City Island Avenue, City 
Island. 





Swiss Recognize de Gaulle 
By Teleptione to Tus New York Tres. 


BERNE, Switzerland, Oct. 31— 


stand it, Prince Humbert would| seemed eager to hear a personal] of restricting the issuance of more|The Swiss Federal Council today 


| authorized the Chief of the Federal 
'Political Department, Marcel Pilet- 
Golaz, to notify the Quai d'Orsay 
in Paris that the Government of 


' 
“welcomes its de- 


|finding him clever, agreeable andjracy, since republics like Germany! marche” and hopes that “the dele- 





try is in ferment and the people 
are desperately seeking homes, 
food and jobs, but when the nation 
has returned to some state of 


some political attacks. My under- 
standing now is that he believes 
that there are many fine things in| 
it that can remain, other provisions 


easy to discuss problems with. 


The general fact that the Com-|like England can be democratic.|the 
munists are not at present anti-| 


can be dictatorial and monarchies| gation at present entrusted with 
liaison between Paris and 


The most important impression! Berne will soon assume a more 


SARS FIFTH AVENUE 


at Rockefeller Center, New York 22 


BABANI 


. 


; 3. a fragrance as exotic and rare as the legendary beauty 
of the princess for whom it was named, 


Tomer Water... 3.50, 7.50 


PERFUME... 15.00 


Subject to 20% Federal Excise Tax Street Floor 


monarchist brought me to ask/|that I received during the whole | complete representation,” 


normality. There are hundreds of!where the wording can be modern- 


SAKS FIFTH AVE | 


iLHOUETTE: 


the immensely popular un 


coat. 


version, 


‘ 


aBRIC: Forstm 


and rar 


Monte 


LLUBE: Enchat 


in flattering fur se 


charm. 


pas 


SAKS FIFTH AVENUE AT ROCKEFELLER CENTER. 


We gave New York 
trimmed fitted 


Here is Gershel’s dramatic 


85.00 


ann’s magnificent 


ras i uced 
e black broadcloth was introd 
s in elegance Vincent 


Sano created this coat, 165.00 


sting, pale colors framed 
t a pattern of feminine 
re by Carmel’s 


“ow —< . 
xed coat, 925.00 


if nderscored he 


tel Nutria trimn 


All, Fifth Floor Coats 


- ad has 
eSupject to Ue ¢ edecas sou 





NEW YORK (18) 
BROOKLYN (2) 


DRS 
* ANE BRYANT*NEW YORK* BROOKLYN 


Open Thursday 9:30 to 9 


Loe | 


weaters!!... the 
more the 


merrier 


... and this one has earned 
top place, ameng the 
assics! . . . Finely knitted 
- carefu ly fitted .. in 
lustre blue, rose, wine, navy 
or 


c 


black. 

SIZES 46 TO 54 
MAIN FLOOR SPORTS SHOP 
Order by Mail or Phone 


NEW YORK—PE 6-5080 
BROOKLYN—MA 4-4200 


Give’ second color choice 


Lone Broo 


® 


Ls > | 


meet me at the 


children's shop Attempt on French Ex- 


SOPP}CCLEPEAESETT ETE PPP TET HEL RHEE Pn POP RNe et HPT POENAa E11] HF 


TULUEPUEL LET ARROORRETTRPVEUETE LETTE YOPO ODOC EreT eT POP ApeRe et ne 


irene 


yi / litt 


Jane encgel 


Madison at 79th 


also East Orange 


dL k e n d e UULSULDSUA HAMANN > 


GALLERIES 


of 
GIMBEL 
BROTHERS 


33rd Street & Broadway 
11th Bear 


NOW ON EXHIBITION 
FURNITURE 


and 


DECORATIONS 


Oil Paintings, Fans 
Silver, Clocks, Rugs 


From the PIERCE, YOUNG 
and other collections. 


PUBLIC AUCTION SALE 
Saturday, Nov. 4th, at 2 


Sales conducted by 
A. N. Bade and L. A. Craco 





1 WEST 39th sTREET| ed” quality of their Americanism. | 
15 HANOVER PLACE! Negro officers say they want above } 


=|he represented in the Senate. 
=\investigation is proceeding under 
=|the personal direction of the pre- 


‘ aie LPT tT 
LS Seesatenenennne 


NEGRO UNIT PROUD 
QF GAINS IN ITALY 


But Men of the 92d Division 
Object to Special Attention 
Because of Race 


By MILTON BRACKER 
By Wireless 0 THE New York TIMES 

WITH A- REGIMENTAL COM- 
|BAT TEAM of the United States 
Ninety-second Division on the 
Italian front, Oct. 30 (Delayed)— 
|The progress and development of 
ithe first Negro combat unit to meet 
ithe Germans’in the European the- 
atre has been “normal and pro- 
gressively satisfactory,” their com- 
manding general said yesterday. 

Aware of the great interest in 
their work and its extreme impor- 
tance in the future Negro share in 
American military history, the men 
who form the fighting vanguard of 
the Ninety-second Division have 
been in the front line for as many 
as sixty-eight days and have kept 
their advance at least up to the 
pace of more experienced divisions 
in the more active sector around 
Bologna. 

The Negro outfit has killed Ger- 
mans—one man is up for citation} 
for having killed thirteen with his| 
damaged carbine—and has had its 
losses. 

Negro GI's and officers—the 
former predominantly from South- 
ern States—deplore accounts that 
play up their achievements along 
lines which they feel point more to 
color than to the accomplishment 
itwelf, and this fact is extremely 
important in any presentation of 
the present role of the outfit. 

The situation in which the Negro 
soldier here finds himself thus 





| 


| by 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


Fighting Pro 


Germans Use First-Line Divisions 
Against the Heterogeneous Allies 


By HANSON W. BALDWIN 


The news from Italy yesterday|victory. Moreover, 


the Allied 


told again of patrol activity and|ground troops that are available 
s iform the most polyglot army on 
lany front. 


slow inching advances toward the 
Po River. The Italian front has 
been virtually stabilized for some 
time, and the slow Allied progress 
is attributable to the same causes 
that made for delay until the Cas- 
sino break-through last May 18. 

The mountainous terrain of the 
Appenines is and will remain—un- 
til we are firmly established in the 
Valley of the Po—a major obsta- 
cle; and even the Po Valley, its 
many streams, rivers and water- 
courses swollen by fall and winter 
rains, will not be an easy highway 
to victory. Weather, particularly 
the weather of the past month, has 
been another major delaying fac- 
tor; the fall rains—and in the 
mountains, cold and snow—low 
overcasts and mud have very ma- 
terially handicapped ground and 
air operations. 


German Units First-Line 


The very stout resistance, skill 
and fighting spirit of the German 
divisions opposed to us is another 
factor of major importance. The 
German divisions in Italy are good, 


|first-line, not second-rate, divisions 


and they have been well handled 
Field Marshal Albert Kessel- 
ring. Their retreat up the spiny 
backbone of the peninsula from 
Cassino and Rome to the Gustav 
Line was well conducted, with con- 
siderably less loss than was orig- 
inally expected. The Germans seem 
to have the equivalent of no more 
than sixteen full-strength divisions 
in Italy, but there are probably 
units from twenty-five to twenty- 





grows out of a situation that ap-| 
plies to all minority groups. The) 
men want to do well as a matter} 
of group pride and at the same) 
time they do not want to be sin-| 
gled out for attention that they) 
feel is based more on their color 
jthan on their work. 
Japanese-American members of} 
the celebrated 100th Battalion,| 
which is no longer in Italy, object-| 
ed to special publicity on awards} 
and citations on the grounds that} 
it overemphasized the “hyphenat-| 
jall to be regarded as American 
|fighting men. Yet they admit 
their men want to do particularly 
well as a matter of race pride. 
The over-all principle of race re- 
lations, established by Maj. Gen. 
Edward M. Almond of Luray, Va., 
who brought the Ninety-second Di- 
vision overseas, was that the de- 
velopment of the new infantry out- 
fit was a military and not a socio- 
logical problem. This approach 
was bound to cut corners, but one 
result has been that Lieut, Gen. 
Mark W. Clark, commander of the 
Fifth Army, feels that there is no 
problem of race relations within 
his forces. 
| This combat team has a white 
icolonel and lieutenant colonel, and 
although there are many Negro} 
jcompany officers, captains and| 
j\lieutenants, none ranks white jun-| 
ior officers. Moreover, all current 
officer replacements are white. 
The colonel, who is a native of! 
Connecticut but has lived long in| 
Virginia, does not foresee the time 
when his outfit will include Negro 


i 
| 
| 





eight divisions. 

The Allied strength is not very 
greatly superior to the enemy’s. In 
the air we have a great numerical 
superiority, but not so much ad- 
vantage in the types of planes most 
useful for close support work— 
fighter bombers, light bombers and 
medium bombers—as is generally 
supposed. But Italy and other bat- 
tle fronts have repeatedly shown 
that air superiority will not substi- 
tute for ground weakness. And the 
principal reason for our slow prog- 
ress in Italy, since our troops 
reached the Gustav Line and the 
Germans offered stouter resistance, 
has been our lack of strength upon 
the ground. We do not have in 





Italy sufficient superiority in 
ground troops to achieve smashing 


Gen. Sir Harold R. L. G. Alex- 
ander has been called upon to do a 
major task with minimum means, 
and no other commander has ever 
been given in this war an army so 
diversified in nationalities, races, 
religions, languages, customs, tra- 
ditions, training and equipment. A 
glance at the known composition 
of the Fifth and Eighth Armies as 
they are today reveals their hetero- 
geneous nature. 


Some of the Various Groups 


Here is a list of those Allied di- 
visions in Italy which have been re- 
vealed by censorship: 


ist Armored A Canadian 

(U. 8S.) Armored 
34th (U. S.) ist (Canadian) 
85th (U. S.) Brazilian 
88th (U. S.) 6th Armored 
91st (U. §.) (South African) 
92d Negro (U. 8.)|2d (New Zea- 
4th Armored land) 

(British) 4th (Indian) 
1st (British) 8th (Indian) 
4th (British) 10th (Indian) 
5th (British) Carpathian 
46th (British) (Polish) 
58th (British) Kresowa (Polish) 
78th (British) 


In addition to the units listed 
above, French troops (Senegalese, 
Goumiers or Berber hill tribesmen, 
Moroccans and European French- 
men), Greeks, Yugoslavs and Ital- 
ians, are fighting or have fought 
at various times in Italy. 

The problem of organizing, sup- 
plying and directing troops of such 
divergent characteristics has been 
and will be a major one. And tra- 
ditionally a composite army made 
up of many Allied units is at a 
disadvantage whén pitted against 
the more homogeneous divisions of 
a single nation. 

General Alexander and Lieut. 
Gens. Mark Clark and Oliver Leese 
have, therefore, done well with the 
tools given them. The primary 
problem in Italy has been a lack 
of means, particularly an insuffi- 
ciency of ground strength and of 
landing craft and shipping. This 
was true before Cassino and it has 
been true again @#ince the 
American Corps composed of three 
of the best veteran United States 
divisions was diverted from Italy 
to preparations for, and the in- 
vasion of, southern France. 





BIGHTH ARMY GAINS 
IN DRIVE ON = 


Consolidates Bridgehead on 
Ronco River—Other Areas 
of Front Quiescent 


ROME, Oct. 31 (4) — Indian 
troops of the British Eighth Army 
have consolidated a half-mile-deep 
bridgehead across the Ronco River 
near Meldola, seven miies south of 
Forli, German strong point on the 
lateral Bologna-Rimini highway, 
the Allied command announced to- 


junior officers outranking white) 4. 


junior officers. 


PAUL-BONCOUR ATTACKED 


Premier’s 
Life Is Reported 


By Wireless to Tue New York Times 

PARIS, Oct. 31—The Socialist 
newspaper the Populaire reported 
today that an attempt had been 
| made on the life of Jean Paul-Bon- 
=|cour, former Premier and leader of 
a group of eighty former Parlia- 
=|mentarians who voted in Vichy in 
=|1940 against plenary powers for 
Marsha! Henri-Philippe Pétain. 

M. Paul-Boncour left Paris last 
week for his country home in the 
=|Loire-et-Cher department, which 
An 


et 


-| fect of Loire-et-Cher. 

Rumors have been reaching 
Paris of troubled conditions in that 
part of central France. 

The Populaire reported also that 
the White Maquis was striving to 
arrange the escape of its mem- 
bers now under arrest. It added 
that a few days ago guards at the 
Cherche Midi prison in Paris frus- 


WMLASATEE 


Polish troops who two days ago 

captured the mountain town of 
Predappio ran into strong German 
prepared positions at Caminato 
that slowed their drive on Forli. 
Action on the Fifth Army’s front 
immediately south and southeast 
of Bologna was confined to patrol 
jactivities. The Americans took 100 
|prisoners in the vicinity of Vastel- 
|laccio. 
Along the Ligurian coast, Bra- 
|Zilian troops captured a 2,800-foot 
peak in the face of heavy enemy 
machine-gun fire. Other Brazilians 
|took Calomini, fifeen miles east of 
Massa. 

On the Adriatic, British troops 
;continued to advance against only 
light resistance. The .Germans in 
the coastal sector were swinging 
|their line north, apparently to an- 





trated preparations for a mass es- 
cape of Gestapo agents and Joseph 
| Darnand’s militiamen. 


AYUMI AAA Ab bbs LE ANG CU ET 


Nazis Doom 10 Foreign Workers 
A Berlin special court has sen- 





MU a 


u nn =|tenced to death ten of twenty-six | Be 
VBeeueeusssesssussuauaels foreign worker accused of “break- | ee $F 


‘Free Book.on Deafness 


ing into food and tobacco shops 
jand stealing goods,” according to 


¢ Write for free booklet entitled “He Who 4 |@ dispatch published in the Berlin 
Hath Ears Let Him Hear.” The intimate, |Illustrierte Nachtausgabe and re- 
personal experience of Mr. Wilk. Book- 
g let will be mailed in plain wrapper. 


AUREX WN. Y., INC. 
511 Sth Ave., New York 17, N. Y. 


¢|ported yesterday to the Office of 
*!War Information. The sixteen 
¢|others received 


4. eee ee eee eee ee | penal servitude.” 





“long terms of |e 7a 


Pearls are so flattering — 


PECK PECK 


chor it more advantageously north 
of Ravenna. 

Bad weather again prevented 
bomber activity. Fighters and 
fighter-bombers attacked enemy 
supply and communication lines. 


Canadians Near Ravenna 


Canadian patrols have reached a 
point two and a half miles from 
Ravenna, the last large Italian city 
on the Adriatic coast south of the 
Po, the London radio said yester- 
day, according to the Columbia 
Broadcasting System, 


PLANS ON FRENCH GUIANA |OPEN THURSDAYS UNTIL 


De Gaulle Government Looks to 
Total Economic Reforms 


By Wireless to Tut New Yore Times. 


PARIS, Oct. 31—The de Gaulle 


blemsin Italy| 


Sixth | = 


Government is preparing a total} 


economic reorganization of French 
Guiana in order to exploit the vast 
natural resources hitherto almost 
disregarded, it was announced to- 
day. 

Under the former regime Guiana 
has produced relatively small 
quantities of gold, rum and sugar, 


the last two of which were scarcely | 


sufficient for local consumption. 
The new plan will transform agri- 
cultural production, with emphasis 
on rice and garden truck and on 
cattle raising to supply the needs 
of Martinique and Guadeloupe, 
which in the past imported rice 
from Indo-China and cattle from 
British colonies. 

Prospecting for gold will be es- 
tablished on methodical lines and 
steps will be taken foi rational ex- 
ploitation of the extensive forests. 


don't you think? Yes we do. We think you 
ought to add their soft lustre to your own, 
in every possible spot. Like the cluster on 
the velvet bow comb for your hair, 1.00*. 
Or the clover leaf for your ear, 1.95". Or a 
double dog-collar. bow tied 2.95". or the 
graduated strand at 3.95". You're pretty. 


FIFTH AVENUE AT 41st * 48th * 55th STREETS * MADISON AT 67th STREET 


“Plus 20% Federal tox 


GARDEN CITY © WHITE PLAINS * GREENWICH * EAST ORANGE 
Our Fifth Ave. Shop ai 41st St. Open Thursdays Until 9 P. M. 





PENCER HONORED 
FOR CANCER WORK 


Chief of National Institute 
Gets Cleveland Award for 
Control by Education 


The fight against cancer, which 
kills forty persons daily in New 
York City alone and accounts for 
160,000 deaths annually in the 
United States, should be organized 
on a. national scale, Dr. R. R. 
Spencer, chief of the National 
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Md., 
declared last night in a speech 
accepting the Clement Cleveland 
Award “for outstanding service 
during 1944 in the effort to con- 
trol cancer by education.” 

The award, a paladium medal, 
was made by Dr. Frank E. Adair, 


president of the American Cancer | iz 


Society, at the annual dinner of the 
New York City Cancer Committee 
at the Cosmopolitan Club, 122 East 
Sixty-sixth Street. The dinner 
opened the annual campaign con- 
ducted in New York from Nov. 1 
to 15 for the dual purpose of 
spreading public knowledge of 
cancer through more than 100 
booths Bet up at strategic loca- 
tions in the city and collecting 
funds for the committee’s $100,000 
annual budget. Dr. John C. A. 
Gerster, chairman of the commit- 
tee, presided. 

Dr. Spencer, who in 1930 re- 
ceived the gold medal of the 
American Medical Association for 
his discovery of a preventive vac- 
cine against Rocky Mountain 
Spotted Fever, suggested that, for 
the purpose of national organiza- 
tion, “special cooperative commit- 
tees” be selected from members of 
the various cancer research foun- 
dations, the American Cancer So- 
ciety, the American Association for 
Cancer Research, the National 
Cancer Foundation and other in- 
stitutions actively engaged in 
cancer control, prevention and 
therapy. 

“Health education,” Dr. Spencer 
said, “is the very soul of preven- 
tion of disease. While research and 
the acquisition of new knowledge 
about cancer is essential, such 
knowledge must continually be 
shared. There is always a cultural 
lag between new knowledge and 
its application. The taxpayer has 





the right, not just the privilege, to 
be kept informed. 

“We are interested in promoting 
all phases of cancer control, pre- 
vention and therapy—the educa- 
tion of the public; the education 
of physicians, which includes the 
setting up of full-time depart- 
ments of cancer biology in medical 
schools; the establishment of pre- 
ventive clinics; the provision of 
adequate diagnostic service; the 
cooperation with States in develop- 
ing cancer-control divisions within 
the framework of State Depart- 
ments of Health and the continua- 
tion of organized research into the 
causes, the diagnosis, the preven- 
tion and the treatment of cancer.” 

Dr. Spencer has been chief of 
the National Cancer Institute since 
1943, having served as assistant 
chief since 1938. The institute was 
founded in 1937 by act of the Sev- 
enty-fifth Congress, when $750,000 
was appropriated for the erection 
of a building and an annual ap- 
propriation of $700,000 was author- 


ed. 
In a statement read at the din- 


ner, Dr. Thomas Parran, Surgeon) J, |, Straus Trustee of Hespita! 
General of the United States Pub-| At a meeting of the trustees of 
lic Health Service, said: the Roosevelt Mospital held yester- 

“In awarding Dr. Spencer the| 4@y 4t the hospital, Jack I Straus, 


Clement -leveland Medal you have eee male hag Macy & Co., was 
honored a great scientist and a|- 

great teacher who has never lost} 

sight of the fact that science is an! 

abstraction until it becomes the 

servant of the people.” 


Cuba Appoints Envoy to Russia 
By Cable to Taz New Yorx Trmzs. 

HAVANA, Oct. 31—Dr. Guiller-| 
mo Belt, Ambassador to the United 
States, was appointed Minister to 
Russia tonight. Cuba recognized 
Russia some two years ago, but so) 
far has not sent a resident Minister | 
to that country. 


More Food for Britons’ Yule 


LONDON, Oct. 31 (®)—England 
was assured of extra food for 
Christmas tables as the Govern- 
ment arranged today to distribute 
20,000 tons of food stored in secret 
larders since 1940, when Britain 
was preparing against invasion. 


Our charge customers can buy in November, pay by January 10th 


Eyeful 


Towering Mad- 
cap* turban 

that covers your 
ears with soft, 
warm wool jer- 
sey. Gaily be- 
decked with felt 
flowers. Black 


or brown. 3.98 


Bloomingdale’s 
Madcaps, 
Street Floor 


*Reg. Trademark 


9 


Figure flattery 


deftly done in 
slim torso lines 


Long and smooth from shoulder 
to hip to fit with soft shape- 


liness. In warm rayon and wool 
flannel, lovely and simple for 
desk-to-date wear. Heavenly colors: 
turquoise, lime and cocoa, 


Sizes 8 to 18. 412.95 
Labeled according to Wool Labeling Act 


On orders outside 


our delivery 


area, add 12c for shipping costs. 


Sports Dresses, 3rd Floor 


charge), or pay cash on each purchase, or use a charge account and pay cash monthly. 


Boy Scout 


regulation equipment 
makes a fine gift 


Not only Boy Scouts but all boys 
will have a better time, learn 
more about camping with 

the right stuff. This is all 
regulation but not confined to 
Scout members. 


Boy Scout Bar Needle Type 
Compass. Handy pocket size. 
16 point dial, jeweled center. 
Lock protects the needle point. 
Octagon shape in plastic case. 


1.23 


Boy Scout Cook Kit. Frying pan 
with folding handle, stew pan, 
lid, drinking cup, flat pan 

to use as plate. Complete with 
khaki case with adjustable 
shoulder strap. 2,25 


Boy Scout Canteen. 1 qt. size. 
Copied from the army canteen, 
Metal with a khaki covering, 
adjustable shoulder straps and 
chained top cap. 41.75 


On orders cutside our delivery area, 
add 6c for compass, llc for canteen, 
and lic for cook kit, for shipping costs. 


Sporting Goods, 6th Floor 


LEXINGTON at 59th, NEW YORK 22, N. Y. « VO 53-3900 
BLOOMINGDALE’S PRICE POLICY guarantees the same low cash prices whether you buy on time (paying our small service 


Our price policy always protects you. 





CHRISTIANS LEARN | 
TENETS OF JUDAISM! 


Clergymen of Both Faiths) 
Take Part in Discussion, 
Unprecedented in City 


Leading Jewish and Protestant) 
ministers gathered yesterday aft-| 
ernoon in a meeting unprecedented | 
in the religious life of this city to} 
explain in detail to the Christian} 
clergy the history and religion of 
Judaism and promote by mutual] 
understanding greater interfaith} 
cooperation and solidarity 

The conference, attended by | 
ninety ministers of both faiths, | 
was held at Temple Israel, 210) 
West Ninety-first Street, and was| 
sponsored by the Association of 
Reform Rabbis, the Greater New 
York Federation of ‘Churches and} 
the Union of America» Hebrew) 
Congregations. 

The keynote was sounded by 
Rabbi Abram J. Feldman of Hart-| 
ford, Conn., who told the assembled | 
ministers: | 

“This is not a missionary meet- 
ing. We merely want to tell you 
about our faith. We rejoice with 
you in the comfort and happiness 
that you have found in your faith. | 
All we ask is that you respect and | 
understand ours.” 

Dr. Henry Sloane Coffin, presi- 
dent of the Union Theological 
Seminary and former Moderator} 
of the general assembly of the) 
Presbyterian Church in the United| 
States, opened the meeting by) 
asking the Jewish rabbis to be 
“frank with us.” 

The new-found interfaith co- 
operation resulting from the war 
was stressed by Capt. M. M. 
Witherspoon, chaplain in charge of 
the Third Naval District. He said 
that there still were a few things} 
separating the different religions, 
but that they would be broken 
down eventually by Jews, Catholics 
and Protestants 

Outlining the history of the Jew 
from ancient Roman times to the 
present, Prof. J. R. Marcus, head| 
of the History Department of the 
Hebrew Union College, declared 
that the Jews here have complete-| 
ly adjusted themselves to the} 
American way of life. 

Following the prepared address- 
es, the meeting was thrown open 
to questions from the floor. The} 
Protestant ministers, in an effort! 
to obtain a clearer insight into the 
Jewish religion, raised numerous 
points about the teachings of 
Judaism. 

The conference was presided 
over by Rabbi William R. Rosen-| 
blum of Temple Israel who, fol-| 
lowing the meeting, led the minis-| 
ters on a tour of his synagogue, | 
showing them the Jewish altar and/| 
religious equipment. 


OUR MEN GRANT WISH | 
TO HOPELESS GERMAN 


By Wireless to Tae New Yorx Timt 

WITH THE AMERICAN THIRD 
ARMY, Oct. 31—A German cor- 
poral, one of ten men left in his 
company, which was encircled at 
the Moselle River near Nancy, sat} 
down and wrote a letter to his wife} 
in which he explained the hopeless- | 
ness of his situation, said oniy a 
miracle would get him home and! 
prayed for capture His prayer} 
was answered. 
Today he is relatively happy| 
working in a supply depot behind! 
our lines and wearing a new uni-| 
form and clean linen for the first) 
time in months. Now he smiles 
once in a while, eats three hot 
meals a day, sleeps in a comfor- 

table bed and keeps his feet dry. 
Only a short time ago he was 
mud under the constant, 
ng fire of artillery and air- 
nd watching his comrades 





dying 
In the letter he wrote just before 
his capture he wondered what it 
was like back in Germany, and 
said he could foresee nothing but 
“a bad end.” After describing the} 
decimation of his company and the| 
comparable situation in others, he 
wrote, “Conditions are indescrib- 
able. I haven’t seen anything like 
this since I have been a soldier.” 

“To put it plainly,” he wrote, 
“every one of us wants to get out 
of this or be captured. We have! 
been encircled for quite some time.| 
I was right when I left you last 
time saying it would be a hard 
fight It is very bad because of 
the planes, but the artillery is ab- 
solutely hell.” 


RUSSIA REOPENS CHAPEL 


Building in Istanbul Returns to 
Orthodox Worship | 


| 
| 
| 


} 


By Wireless to THz New York Times 

ROME, Oct. 31—The Russians 
have reopened the orthodox chapel 
in the former Soviet Embassy and 
general consulate in Istanbul, Tur- 
key, according to news reaching 
the Vatican. today and which 
aroused much comment. 

The building still serves as the 
summer residence of the Soviet) 
Embassy to Ankara so that the} 
restoration of worship could not, 
have taken place without direct! 
order from Moscow 

Priests at the Russian college 
here seem to believe that this So-| 
viet move in the historic liturgical 
center of the old Orthodox Church | 
has important political as well as 
religious significance 





FLIGHTS 
DAILY... 


NEW YORK TO 


TORONTO 


and across Canada 
Lv N.Y 8:00 A.M.—1:30 P.M.—7:10 P.M. 


TRANS-CANADA 4tZanty 


Conade's Notional Air Service, Fiying Coast to Coast | 
ond to Newfoundiand over ao 5,276 mile rovte. 
673 Fifth Ave. (Cor. 53rd St.) Phone Plaza 3-614) 


EDUCATION an 


LANGUAGES | 
PIGHFR SCHOOL OF LANGUAGES | 
college instructors. Conversational 
Private lessons 99c 4% hr. 9-9 dally 
40th St. (Est 36 years). PE. 6-6377. 


THE NEW YORK 


TIMES, WEDNeoWvAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


Mpg anil wen mi 


ao yey frltiit antl Ladky 
the L was of liday 
cite Tip Lid, / VL 07 

ta glanify the Kath | 





or 


Latest Addi 


4 
a 


BR te associate 
WASHINGTON, Oct 


4,811 


Press 
31 

announced today 

the 


Neu 


casualties 
by the War Department were 
following New York, 


Jersey and Connecticut: 
Wounded 
NEW YORK 


European Area 


from 


CAF 

strana = 
GEORGE E 
Bufta 


HARRY 
Park A 


Mrs 
Flush- 


mother 
7th Rad 


p 


DONALD } 


Mrs 


Mrs 
Hill 
Mil 


DOMINICK siste: 
4 =yra 45¢€ 
CREIGHTON 


mother 
Richmond 
mother, Mrs 


June 
St 


wife 


115 W. 734 
Evelyn Bal- 


Tk 


Mrs 
Y 
the 
JACK mother 
230 Madison 


St 


S/Sgt. LCREN W stepfather, 
Myers, Alexander 


HOMER; wife, Mrs 


Pfc. LOUIS 
ynkers 
PI 


N 


father 
okiyn 
fe, Mrs 


ALEX 
St 


Mary M 


AEL J mother, Mrs. Helen 


ROBERT 
rd, HE 


Mrs 
New 


E 


Cit 
Lt G 
74th 


14th 


wife 
f St 


ENCE J father, Carl 
xe 

SOLOMON; mother 
E r St New 


m 


Bes- 


Mrs 
trasmus § ork 
SIDNEY V 
Kenmore 
CARL R 
hurst 
SEPH S 


m 


wife, Mrs 


WILLIAM T 


father, 

Waterford 
HARRY P 
Buffalo 

ARLES; mother 
St., New York 

T.; sister, Mrs 


Mrs. 


Mrs. Orpha 


Mrs. Edith 


R Leona E 
FRED M 
St., Brooklyn 
S/Sgt. WILLIAM Y 
Chancellor, 344 Greene 


John Ca- 


brother 
Ave 


wife, Mrs 


CAMILLUS Jr 


father, Dewain 


a 
NNETH H 
ir wife, Mrs 
Nostrand Ave 


MICHAEL: father, Frank Chi- | ROMAN 


ers 

Mrs 
ide 
s. Jean 


STEPHEN A 
ci. 207-09 48th 
ARTHUR J 
Britton ve 
CORNELIUS W 
124 Convent Ave., 
ROY R mother, 

Elma 


7 Ave 
wife 


El 


k 

Sot 

iensk 
Sot 


g 
7 86-04 
ist/Set 

e Clark 
Pic 


wife, Mrs. | 
Lillian 


Mrs 


Mrs 
F.: mother 
Chester 
Mrs 


GORDON 
) Port 
wife 


Pf CHARLES H mother, Mrs 
nan, Eggertsville 
Pvt. JOHN C mother, Mrs 


rs, 675 Woodward Avé 


Cath- 
Ridge- 
2RSTEIN, Pvt. HARRY; wife 
395 Tiebout Ave., New York 
NCENT F Jr father, Vin-/| 
West Haver | 
FRANCIS J wife ! Mary 
79th St., I 
JOSEPH 


Mrs. Rose 


J t 
St Brookly 
HARLES 
ll P 


ther M 
‘1. Bklyn 
Mrs 
New 
Anna 
rk 


Mr 


Rd 


29th Ss ave ve 
DOMINIC 
420 White 


sister 
Plains 


E 
Pf 


An 
Bronx 


5 1 
ne 1 


Mrs 


nx 


mother 


St., 


Pvt. EDWARD A.: 
719 E. 233d 


IGENE L.; 


Br 


ian 


friend Mary 


Miss 


Mrs. Catherine 


r 


EISNER, ! 
M. Eisner "lain 
ELDRED ROBERT C 
% | Lynbrook 

HENRY 

FRANK A 
ner henectady 

PHILLIP A mother 


wife Mr Adele} 
Brooklyn 


mother, Mrs 


P] 
Mar- | 


Mrs. Mary 


2NARD; mother, Mrs. Kate| 

Watkins St., Brooklyn 
LIONEL R.; father, Robert D 

CHARLES R.: wife, Mrs. Ger- 
. 105-46 62d Dr Forest 


wife, Mrs. Marcia} 


brother-in-law, | TEMALIS 


167 103d § New York 
WILLIAM H wife. Mrs. Grace 
Ossining 


Feeks I 
pr 


FERRARO 
re 252 York 


irs 


FIERO 


PAUI 
t. 95-05 Church 
Pvt JOHN ¢ 
60-90 20t! AY 
Pfc. CHESTER 
Albion 
AEL . 


reé 
reewald A‘ 


NSKI 


fathe Stan- 
RAPH 
c 119 Rapelye 


GAMBALE. Pvt. ANT 


), Pt Mrs 
HONY 


mother 


Mrs 
New Y¥ 


JOHN A 
17 Roobeveit 


ste 
Ave 
wite Emilie 
Brooklyn 
H father 
Ave Bronx 


James 
New 


ALTE! 
rand 
I aunt 


ROBERT 
® Tot! 


M2 &E New 


Mrs. Mary 


VINCENT 
anda 
LIAM (¢ 


Ht St 


mother 

yr 
Ast 
sxt. HARGIS 
‘ 


wife. Mrs 


FRANCIS A.: wife 


EARL R father 


WILLARD mothe Mrs 


ite 


ARTHUR wife M Mar 


ngfield 


B 
143d i I 


ALEXANI 


ER 


father 

vodhaven 
Hans Iwen, 
Jamal 

>vt BERNARD 

Cheext 


k 


109-46 Lift 


mother 
pwaga 
mother 


wink 
Mrs 


Orone 


tAYMOND 


ROBERT mother Mrs 
ast Durhar 
FRANCI nele, Morton L 


JOHN Mra 
( t 


LESTER 


Mrs 


Ar K 
KREIS Henry Kreiss 


LA 
LAPAGI 


ett Pagiia Oneida 
gt DAVID P 
Peplowski, Plattsburgh 


mother 


mother, M 


Ar lu 
LARNER mother, Mrs 


Geol gia 


| 


Helen | 


New P 


Viola Beebe.| PATRICOLA, 7 


father, Nicholas | ppnonEe 


Charies| pena 


| 
| 


ther, Mrs, Hulda | PHI! 
Bernice | PIZZANELLI 
Mrs | PLAGWICZ 

M. | POLKOVITZ 
mother, Mrs.|POMPA, Pvt. MIC 
Lena > 


Beatrice | POUCHER 


| 


i 


New York. | RYAN 


Marga-|.. 


| SCHATZ 


SCHAT 


Mrs. | STRULO 


| SWANSON, Sat 


|SYLVA 
| TAAFFE 


Hills. | TANNENBAUM, 


Pasquale Fer-} vi 


| 
| 
| 


Frances | WEIMER 


Miss) ALC 


brother, Henry) ANT 
Helen | ANZALONE 
Mrs. Dolores! AYERS 


Albert | BAUME 


Edward |" ya zell 


} 


i 





Amona! tur 


WILLIAM) 
Hallesbor 
EDWARD 
“MAlLK 400 Havemeyer 


turk 
S/Set mothe 


Ave 


“a 


EDWARD br 
54-60 43d St 


ZEWSKI Pic ther 


Matuszewsk 


HONSE J 


St 


siste 
New 
athe 


ALI 
York 


‘ 


er Fred Mayer 
. 

nother 
m Ave 


Lewiat St 


THOMAS A.: father, Thomas 
0 High St Yonkers 
EDWARD J Jr 
McCienin, Hornell 
(LL, Capt. BERNARD P mother 
Bernard A. McDonnell, Lackawanna 
ADDEN, S/Sget. WILLIAM P.; father 
r McFadden, Olean 
S/Set. JOSEPH A 
McPartiand, 204 Manhattan 


Pvt 


father 


An 


mother 
Ave 


icPARTLAD 


wife, Mrs. Marie 


Brooklyn 


t. JOSEPH P 
Nostrand Ave 
Munnsville 
RICHARD F 
2954 Valentine Ave., 
ROBERT H wife 
re 
BYRON 
Park West 
JOHN father 


mothe Mrs 
New York 
Mrs. Ethel 


MEADE 
lary Meade 
MEIDEL, Pvt 
N Kenm 
P 
Central 
5/Set 
ra 


ide 

NDEZ 
idez, 485 
e-RCURIO 


brother, Lou Me- 
New York 
Thomas 
ise 
FREDERICK H.:; mother 
Sayville 
EDWARD J 
Depew 
P 


lie Munsell 
MURAWSKI, Pvt 
john A. Muraweki 

Pvt. EDWARD 


mother, Mrs 


father, Robert 


JOSEPH J mother, Mrs 
Owego 
BRUNO J father 
New Brighton 
S/Sgt. MICHAEL 
37 Skillman Ave 
Pf PETER J 

Middletown 

5 ROY A 
Cheektowaga 

5 MICHAEL F 
04 Guernsey 
mother 
New York 
LEROY J 
140 W 


TI, Pvt Graziano Ostl 
33 Pine 
ALERMO 
Pa! ) 
PANETT 
Panetta 


St 


Frank 


"t 


A father 
Brooklyn 
Cc father, Peter 


mother, Mrs. Bella 


Patricola 


mother Mrs 
St., Brooklyn 
Mrs. Adelaide 


T 
Pedone 
Pvt. ROBERT 
Pena, 1871 3d Ave 
[NNINGTON, Pf 
dors M. Pennington 
re 


Christine 


Mrs 
St 


wife 


P 
66th 


vrvur 
New 
PEPIN, Pvt 
zalez, 79 E 
PERCESEPE 

Percesepe 

MAN, Pt 


R: father. Juan Rios Gon- 
St New York 
ROLAND R father, 
nke 
ROBERT 
151 McDonald Ave., 
Pvt. ALEX; mother, Mrs 
253 Henry St New York 
Pvt GEORGE E Jr 
Rina Phillij Kenmore 
LIPS, S/§ JOHN E 
Canajoharie 
Pvt. BENJAMIN B 
Pizzanelli, Southampton 
Pic. BENJAMIN T mother, Mrs 
Mary Plagwicz, 586 Morgan Ave., Brooklyn 
Pfc. BERNARD B.; father, 
Buffalo 
AEL F.: 


JUAN 
104th 
Pic 
Y 
mother, Mrs. Anna 
Brooklyn 


mother 


father, Joan O 


Pr 
wife, Mrs 


Dor M 


is 


man Polkovitz 


mother, Mrs. Mary 
n Ave., Corona 
wife, Mrs. Hester G 


New York 


102-20 
Abraham 
2967 Vyse Ave 
lst Lt. DAVID A 
222-16 Davenport 


M 
POSNER 
Posner 


Pompa 
Pvt 


Ave., 


wife, Mrs 


H. Poucher, 


va 
V 


RABREAU 
Rabreau 
RAGANO 


+ tte 


Set JOHN 
526 W. 175th St, New York 
Pvt. FELIX P.: mother, Mrs 
101-13 Woodhaven Blvd, Queens 
RE Pfc. RAYMOND E.; wife, Mrs. Jean 
i H cor 

guardian, Fr 
I Jacksor 


REILLY 

I illy, 5619 S 
ROCKER, | Pfc 

Ada Rocket 
ROCKSTROH 
Rockstrot nect 
ROLL, T/5 


Mrs 
clyn 
mother, 


Re 


Mrs 
n. n : 


s. Gusta Hellman 
York 
J uncle, Vincent 
Long Island City 
wife, Mrs. Barbara 
t Richmond Hill 

MICHAEL W.; mother, 
804 E. 178th St., 


ry Ave New 
NTHONY 
é th Ave 
RUO GEORGE M 
N. R f, 104-55 110t) 
RUSOKOVITCH, Ist Lt 
Mrs. Olga Rusokovitch 
New York 
Pvt 
yan 


Romar 5A 


CONNERS: mother, Mrs 
Buffalo 

HERBERT; mother, 
Bennett, New Yor 
Pfc. JIM R.: br 
97th St Corona 

Pvt. FELIPE; brother, 
63 Kelly St Bronx 
Pvt. STANLEY S uncle, 
nan, 107 E. 56th St., Brooklyn 
1B. Capt. ALBER F wife, Mrs 
Schaub, 442 W. 4 S.. New York 

Pvt. PETER father, John Scollo 

147 150th St.. Ozone 

AW 2d Lt LELAND 
Erma W. Shaw. Poughi 
IEG, Pf HAROLD J 
M Sies Buffal« 

TH, Pfc. EDWARD G 

t ” Arden t New York 
JOSEPH G wife Mr 
} 60th Lane Glendale 
RAYMOND wife 
Horseheads 
Pte ALEXANDER H 
Sobczynski, Lackawanna 
Pfc. WILLIAM E wife 


280 Bradford St 


e l€ ’ 
SANFT, Pvt 
Sanft, 31 
SANGEMINO 


18 


Mrs 


ther, S. Sange- 


ANT AN Alfredo San- 


ta 


4 


Berg- 


Jose 


F 1 
SCOLLO Ww 


Si wife, Mrs 


S mother, Mrs 


mother, Mrs 


MITH Pvt 
Smit 79-1 
SMITH Pvt L Mrs. Betty 
M. Smit? 
SOBCZYNSKI 
Mrs. Leocadia 
SOBOLEWSKI 
Blanche Sobolewsk! 


wife 


Mrs 
3rook 
Pvt ASHER 8 father Jacob 
Glens Fall 
Pvt VNENDALI 
Soltis Endicott 
; Pe ANTHONY 
74 13th St 
Cpl ES E 
n, 367 Avs 
SPALLINA. ( 
ne S R 


SOLOFYT 
Soloff 
LTI Mrs 


G mother, 


father, Liborio 
‘klyn 


Bay 
Mrs 


JAM 
9th 


n Mary 
New Wor 
MICHAEL; mother, Mrs. Jo- 
chester 
SPECHT Py WILLIAM J Mrs 
IT Specht B ff 6 
ARKLAUF, Pvt \TTHEW 
je S. Starklauf, 24-17 
City 
Pfc 
2070 


mother 


Mrs 
Long 


wife 
St 


G 
4list 
Celia 
York 
Mrs 


Mrs 
New 
mother 


s mother 
and Ave Bronx 
RALPH R 
Oneonta 
Pfc. PAUL M 
Ub Watertown 
Pvt ELIE 
vitz 1155 


HYMAN 
Gt 


son 


John C 


brother 
Stoddard 
VITZ 


Struk 


Mrs. Ger 


Ave 
Mrs 


wife 
trud Gerard 
York 
EARL M wife, Pris- 
Frewburg 
M 


ci Swanson 
SWARTZ, Pf WILLIAM 
Althea Swartz, Rensselaer 
Pfc. MILTON §&.; 
Sylva, Hicksville 

T5g. FRANCIS V.: 
Taaffe Albany 
Pfc. HERBERT 
5649 Kings Highway 
Pfc. IRVING: wife 
1037 Hoe Ave., Bronx 


FRANK 
38-05 Crescent 


m- Mrs 


mother, 


wife Mrs 


H 
mother, Mrs 

Catherine 
TANNENBAUM a 
Tannenbaum Brooklyn 
Tannenbaum New 
York : ‘ 
Cecella 


sister Mrs 


St., 


Pvt 
H. Thomas 
Mrs. Flora 
New York 
Harry Vogel 
New York 
wife, Mr 


wife, 
r Ave 


Lucy 


L 
1604 ist Ave 
RAYMOND J i 
wiak, Buffalo 
Jr wife, Mt 
Myrtle Ave 


New Yor 
vther 


Vir 


116-20 Rich 


10nd 
t. FRANK mother, Mrs. Bar 


Weimer 


H 


bara B 
WHALEN Mrs 


Jack- 


V sister 
orthern Bivd 
Mrs 


Mrs 


Mrs 


B oxlyt 
yal List 
F father 


New York 
ister, Mrs 


Additic 
JOSEPH 


234th 
M 


‘An 


{ISEGER, Pt 
Aemise ger 9 E 
ALDI, Pvt. ALBERT 
Decerbe chene 1 
MAR P d Mi 
{ Nichola 


John 
City 
Pauline 


AF 


Rafael Alo 
w York 
wife 


Ave 


father 
Ave Né 
ROCCO J 
19-11 324 


1090 


ANGELICCHIO 


Mr 


‘ Angeli 


father 
Brooklyn 
mother, Mrs 


NIATO, Pf ALEXANDER V 
toniato, lf Park Ave 
Pt FRANK J 
Anzalone, Albany 
Pvt. HOWARD F 


meph Atl 


PP? 


Mrs. Ola 


mother 

: iraw 

rE! gt. JOSEPH 
Baumeiste Central 
Pic. HUBERT R 


A) 
brother 


F 
Islip 
mother 
Brooklyt 
mother Mrs 
land 
father 


} nel 
BENTEF 

i ebe Bente 
BERGER : 


‘ 
Is 
’ 


St 


uncle Joseph 


Mrs 
Ma 


mother, 
yn 
Mrs 


RY ¢ 


527 Brook 
HAR wife 
Waverly 


“DONALD R 


BLACKMA 

azelia 
BLISH father 
B 


ILI 


ah 


F Mrs. Lydia 


I mother 
y St, Brooklyn 

ANTHONY (¢ 
ari Jamestown 


Rt 


wife. Mre 


friend 


ENNETH J mother, Mra. Lil 
hoe 
GEORGE W wife, Mrs 
2d Brooklyn 
DWARD (¢ wife 
rke, 49 Almond St.. Annadale, 8S. I 
TLER, ist Lt. JAMES A., Jr father 
A. Butler 2-12 157th St.. Flushing 
CAPPUCCIO, Pvt SILVIO A mother 
Esther R. Cappucci 2175 Washington 
i New 
CARGES, Pfc. HENRY J., J ul 
( t B kp 
CARNEY JAMES G 
if I viile 
PHILIP A mothe 
Leonard Brooklyr 
DESIDERIO E ennd, Pe 
Fulton St Brooklyn 
vt. ALVY A mother, Mrs 
N nois 
GABINO: wife 
h St., Astoria 
d Pvt. PATSY 


imi, 2878 86th 


i21 


1 I 
KE. Set. E Mrs. Marion 


BUR 
James 


Mrs 
Ave 


B x 


er, Henry J 


ster. Mrs 


Mrs. Mary 


CARNI 


f 


Isa 


Mrs 


father 
Brook 


P 
St 


mother Mrs 
New York 
Ann Cha 


TONIO 
35th St., 
wife Mrs 


Brooklyn 
father, Henry Ciancio 


CEBOLLERO, Pf« A? 
Isabelle Cebollerc 523 

CHAZED Pvt. ISIDOR 
ren. 732 Sheffield Ave 

CIANCIO, Pfc. FRANK 
Port Chester. 


Albert | 





| 


| MANCUSO 


| MARKHAM 


| MARTIN 


| MARTISHEK 
New | 


j 


Milfred | 


Miss Margaret| 


Jean | 


Delma Cas- | 


Miss Mary | FAGIN 


mn Mayer \ 


COLOMBO Pvt 
Colombo 

|CONTE. Pfc 
beth Conte, 

COOKE Pvt 
Cooke, Albany 
OTTER, Pfc 
Catherine Cott 


COTTON, T/Sgt 


Betty Cotton 
DECHIARO, Pfc 
Anna 
Brooklyn 
DOWLING 
Mrs. Louise M 
DRAGOTTO, Pt 
Dragotto 
| DRURY, S/Sat 
|} ma G. Drury 


urel/EVANS, 2d Lt 
156 Pinehurst Ave 


| Evans 
Pvt 
4815 15th 
ALLON,. Cpl 

lon, 323 Corn 
| FLEMING vt 
Josephine Mag 


SA 
ave 


Mrs.|/ FULLER, Staff Sgt 
Fuller 


Mary E 
GIAMBRA, Ptc 
M. Giambra 
GIANNONE, Pfc 
rie Giannone 
GILBAKIAN, 
Mrs 

nyside 
GLOVER, Tech 
Charies Glover 
GOETZ, Pvt. H 
Anna Goetz, 
GOLDSTEIN 
An 
GONYEA 
Mrs. Anne 
GRAY, Cpi 
Williams 
GRIFFIN, Pvt 
Marguerite R 
GRIPPO, Pfc 
Grippc 8&3 


ech 
I 





Mrs. | 


| 


D | HA YES 





| JACOBY 
John | 


Rose J 
| JUNOD 


| K 


Hy- | 
| 


wife, Mrs Janet | 
Queens | 


Mary | 


An- | 


KLAVANS 


ank | KNEZICH 


Mary | 


father, Gordon | 


| 
} 
| 


| 
Kath- | KUJAWA, Pfc 
Lena | LANDIS, 





Myrtle | LEVITZ 
Clara | LEWICKI 


Marie | LOBELSKY 


| MAKOWSKI 


Mary | MAYER 


Mrs. Ruth | McCABE, Pvt 


ig Island | McDERMOTT 


Ye Kn 
half-brother, | MEYER 


| KAMINSKI 


Haberman 
HACKETT 
Rita M 
HALI Pfc 
Hall, Hilton 
Pvt 
Hayer 
HECHT, Pvt 
Hecht 436-38 
HEINTZ, Set 
Heintz, 155-24 
HERON 


506 
Pic 


ginia 


HILLOCK, Pfc 
lock, Buffalo 
HODGE, Pvt 
ene Hodge 
HODGE, Pfc. W 
riet M. Hodge 
HOFFMAN, Pvt 
lan T 
HOYT, Capt 
J. Hoyt, 
IRVINE, Pvt 
thea E 


Fa 


H 


Pfc 
Jacoby 
JAHREIS 
Martin Jahreis 
RDO, Pfc 
Jerdo 
Pvt 
th Junod 


Tech 


JE 
Wha 
Lc 
45 
Pfc 
yn Kaminski 
“ANE, Pfc 
Denge 


be 


Pvt 
Kane 
KARASKA. Sgt 

araska Sr 

KARDACH, 
Kardach, 
KATSOULAKOS, 
Pauline 
Brooklyn 
KELLY, Set 
erine Kelly, 
KEL TY, Pfc 
Kelty 


KENYON 


Pfc 


” 
‘ 


Sgt 


KESSLER 
Fessle: 


Pfc 


2d 
Esther J 
Pvt 
Lucy Knevzic} 
KOHLBRENNER 
mother, Mrs 
KONNER, Pix 
nor Konne1 
KOPLITZ > 
864 E. 172d 
KOPP, Pvt. JOE 
Olinville Ave 
KORDIYAK, Ist 
Kordiyak. Grar 
KOZIKOWSKI 


St 


KRAEGER, Pvt 
varet Kraeger 
KRALIK, Pfc 
Kralik. 34-27 4 
Kulawa, Buffa 
Pic 
Bertha Landis 
LaPOINT, Pvt. E 
LaPoint, St. R 
LEE, Pfc. SHUC 
32 Mott St 
LeMAY, Pfc 
LeMay, Chatea 
JANDOWSKY 
s Helen 
E. Pfe 
1465 5ist St 
LEVIN. Pvt 
son 165 


M 


Blake 
Pvt 
Levitz 

Pfc 
817 St 
Pvt 
448 
P\ ¢ 
Buffa 
HEN 


Lewicki 


Lobelaky 
LOFFREDO 
Loffredo 
LONG. Pvt 

Tully 


LORITO, Corp. FRANK 
|} 180 Menahan St 


LOSEE, Pvt. RA 
Losee. Poughke 
LUDIWITZ. Cor 
Mrs. Frances 
Bronx 


Helen Makowsk 
New York 


MANCUSO. Pvt 


sephine L. Mancuso, 2074 Arthur 


York 

Pvt 
cuso, North Be 
MANNES Pfc 
mother. Mrs 
MARESCA, Pvt 
A. Maresca 
Set 
Clara C 
MARQUETTE 
tha J. Marauet 
Pvt 
Martin, Inwood 
Jean Martishek 
MATTERN. Pf< 
Adelena Matter 
MATUSZEWSKI 
Mre 
ville 
S/Set 
T. Mayer, Sche 
MAYONE, T/5g 
Mayone, Kingst 


father, David| MAZUREK. Pfc 
Josephine Mazurek 


J 
21-59 
Ww 


McCabe 
McCUE, T/5g 
Julia D 
Ss 
McDerm 
1 
McD: 
Pf 
Menni 


Helen 
York 
McDONALD 
Delia 
MEN 
P 


ITI 
ne 


Pvt 


80 W 


yer 
NAVITCH 
Mi Anna Mik 
LOT Pi El 
Milot. Renssela 
MINUTE. Pfc 
Minute, Manch 
MOATES, list Lt 
mie H. Moates 
MOELLER, T 
Moeller, Niagatr 
MORAITI Pv 


George 


MiTE 


s 


ooklyn 
MORRISSEY, Pv 
May Morr 
MORSE 
Morse 
MOSS 
Frances 
MROZ. Pvt 
t Pawlik, No 
MURELLO, Pyt 
Angelina Mure 
lyn 


iasey 


Moss 
Fr 


| NALDRETT, S/S 


| NAPOLI 


“Sy | NEJMAN 


| NOLAN, 


NOLE 


Mrs. | 


Charlies | 





Francis | 


PETERS, 


| 
} 
j 


| NAWROCKY 


|} OLSEN 


Naldrett 
Pvt. J 
1258 
Cc 
Nawre 
Corp 
Schen 
Ist Lt 
Thomas F. No 
Set. LEO 
New Rochelle 
NOODELMAN 
Minnie Noodei 
York 
NORTON, Sgt 
35-55 
Pic 
A 


Lena 
Cardullo 


M 


Alice 


Nejman 


Norton 
NUCIFORA 


Mr fori 
Mit Marie 


wh 
SER 


New Y 
NUNGE 
teal A. Nunges 
O'BRIEN, Pte 
E. O'Brien 
O’'COIN, Pvt. I 
Carolina O'Col 
O'CONNELL, Ist 
Florence L, O 
New York 
O'CONNOR, Pvt 
O'Connor, 430 
Sgt 
Olsen, 89-31 
PADRON, Pvt 
Charlies Rivera 
PAGE, Pvt. BE 
Page, 920 Rive 
PALAZZOLO 
Palazzolo, 
PANDISH 
Pandish 
PANKO, 


21 


89-2 
Pt 
Bingt 
Pfc. JO 
nich, 1833 Clir 
PAQUETTE Pt 
Mary Paquette 
PARLAVECCHIA 
Ann J. Parlave 
PASCUZZI T 
irs. Caroline 
PA NTE, Pfc 
Passange, 24-11 
PERSING T 
Mrs. Lillian F 
PERUSO, 24 Lt 
Peruso, 2238 A 
PESTILLO, Pvt 
Pestillo 
PETEROY, Pfc 
Frank Peteroy 
Pvt. C 


SSé 


Peters 
PETILLO, Pvt 

Petillo, 140-50 
PHELAN S/Sgt 

Julia C. Phela 
PICA, Pvt. ANG 


105-11 148th St., 


Rochester 
JAMES 
146 Elm St 


JOSEPH 


Dechiaro 


lst Lt 


JAMES F 


Pvt 
Virginia Gilbakian 


Pic 
nette Ladgin, 2144 Crotona Pkwy, N. Y 


IRVING 
Savannah 


LOUIS A 
La Salle 
| HABERMAN, Siaff Sgt 


Hacke 
WARD w.: 
ARTHUR 
JOSEPH M 
BERTRAM; mother, 
erine on “ine iene Mrs. Cath- 


EDGAR V.; 


Hoffman 

325 Riverside 
WESTON L 
Irvine 


559 Saratoga Ave 


JOHN E.: 


EDWARD W.: 


v JOHN; mother 
90 Throop Ave 


N 
Buffalo 
Katsoulakos, 
WALTER J.: mother, 
I ROLAND M 
73 Hausman St 
HERBERT R 
Herbert R. Kenyon, Cedarhurst 
1933 Grand Concourse 


L 
Klavans 


Elizabeth 
BERNARD H 
998 


S/Set 
Irene F. Kozikowski 


Levandowsky 


1797 Union St 


Atkins 


Lutherwich 


Pfc 


Agnes 
412 5th 


Markham 
Pvt 


JOHN 


Pvt 


Katherine Matuszewski, Saint Johns- 


McCue 


92d 


ANTHONY 


Teampournia! 


JOUN 


BE 


Pvt 
ROBERT 


29th St., 


sgt 


ROBERT J 
Mamaroneck 


LEROY 8S 


Pte 


5g 


97-56 99th 
NESTOR 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


WILLIAM J.: father. John 


P mother. Mrs. Eliza 


Yonkers 
sister, Miss Bertha 
mother, Mrs 
New York 
Mrs 


Pp . 
Ave 
mother 


RAYMOND 
er. 75 Poplar 
MORTON J 
Ilion 
SEBASTIAN A 
2441 Coney 


SHERIDAN T., Jr 
Dowling, Harrison 
JOSEPH A.; father 


RICHARD E 
North Rose 
JOHN W 


Mrs 
Ave 


mother 
Island 


mother 


Frank 


Thel- 

father, Erving L. 
New York 

Mrs. Rose Fagin, 





c 


Utica 


wife, Mre 


MUEL; wife 
Brooklyn 
James Fal- 


Mrs 
N.Y 
Mrs 


father, 
clia St Brooklyn 

ROBERT W sister, 
uire, 61-41 Woodbine St 
HRAOLD J.: mother, 
Corinth 


JOSEPH; wife 


Falconer 


MICHAEL; mother, Mrs. Ma- 
40-27 67th St.. Woodside 

JOHN £E.. Jr.; 
47-33 39th Pl., Sun- 


Sgt. WESTLEY S&.; 
Cuddebackville 
ERMAN V. Jr 
Troy ’ 
STANLEY 


mother, 
mother 


Sth Gr. HERMAN F.; 


Gonyea, Albany 
c sister, Mrs. Ethel 


KENNETH W.: 
Griffin, Utica 
mother, Mrs. Nettie} 
St New York 
HARRY; father, Max 
Eastern Parkway, Brooklyn 
LAWRENCE J.; wife, Mrs 
Syracuse 
father, 


mother, Mrs 


tt 
Charies W 


L 
St 


wife, Mrs. Vir- 
New York 
wife, Mrs 
York Ave.. New York 
Mrs. Mary 
Howard Beach 


21 Union 
Loulse 


1024 St., 


. Bronx, N. Y 
AUSTIN; brother, Peter Hil- 


mother, Mrs. Earl- 
leoner 


ESLEY K.; mwther, Mrs. Har- 
Hornell 
WALTER J 





1076 Lincoln PI’ pee 

. neoln Pl.. Brooklyn 

OWARD C wife, Mrs. Betty 

Dr.. New York 
Doro- 


wife, Mrs 
Horseheads 
Thelma 


Lil- 


MARTIN wife. Mrs 
Brookly 
Set. FREDERIC 
Tonawanda 
mother, Mrs 
Mrs 


Brooklyn 
Mrs. Kath- 
Miss 
Margaret R 


father 


lionsburg 

JUIS H.; mother 

? Coney Island Ave 
WALTER: wife, 
Syracuse 

half sister, 


Brookly: 

rooklyn 

GEORGE J.: fathe 

jagara Falls r, George J 
RWIN J: 


Pvt. W 


1, Freeport 


father, Joseph 
ILLIAM: mother, Mrs 
375 Flatbush Ave 


Mrs. Cath- 
rth. Brooklyn 

wife, Mrs. Frances 
Brooklyn. 
Jr 


13 Ave. No 


father, Dr 


wife, Mrs. Mae 
J New York 
WALTER A mother, Mrs 
2157 Ocean Ave., Brooklyn 
ALBERT D.: mother, Mrs. 
Amsterdam 
Pfc. EDWARD J.: 
<ohlbrenner. Buffalo 
wife. Mrs. Elea- 
cehixc a. Brooklyn 
A; father, Harry Kopli 
iN — York _— 
N; father, Joseph Kopp, 307 
Bronx, New York as ’ 
Lt. PETER: father 


nville 
EDMUND G.; wife, Mrs. 
Pine Hollow 
JOHN A.; mother, Mrs. Mar- 


Rome 
JOHN Mrs 
Mrs 


NORMAN H 
t 


grand- 


E. 8th 


George 


mother, Anna 
Astoria 


mother, 
L.: 





Ist St 
JOHN 
lo 
CLINTON 
Elmira 
LcARL D 
evis Falls 
“K W fri 


T Agnes 
Mrs 


Marion 


mother. 
mother, Mrs 
nd, Toy K. Lee, 
J 


New York 
LELAND 


P father, Henry 

ugay 
Pfc EDWARD J 

Amsterdam 


Mrs. Ida Levine, 


sister 


AX; moth?r 


Brooklyn 
HAROLD A.: 


uncle, Philip Meyer- 
Brooklyn 

wife. Mrs 
Brooklyn 
mother 
Yor) 
mother 
Brooklyn 
J.; father 


Ave 


DAVID Hannah 


MARTIN Mrs. Anna 
h St. New 

ROBERT 
Ave 
ANTHONY 


lo 
RY H.; father, Ralph J. Long, 


Mrs. Sara 


Michael 


J: father, Paul Lorito, 
New York 
LPH T.: mother, Mrs 
epsie 

Dp. ALEXANDER J 
588 Tinton 


Emma 


mother 
Ave 


Miss 


FRANK J sister 
Bronx, 


i, 828 Courtland Ave 


Jo- 
New 


Mrs 
Ave., 


ANTHONY: mother 


JOHN: father 


Ralph Man- 
liport 
CHRISTOPHER F 
Mannes, Syracuse 
VINCENT T.: father, Ralph 

Ave., Brooklyn 

BRUCE 5S mother, Mrs. 
Constableville 
CECIL J.: wife, Mrs. Mar- 
Watertown | 
N mother, Mrs. Edna 


Jr 


te 


JOHN J.. Jr wife, Mrs 
213 India St., Brooklyn 

CHARLES A mother, Mrs. 
86-35 232d St., Bellerose 


n 
Pvt. EDWARD M.; mother, 


Mildred 
Nellie 
Mrs 


J.: wife, Mrs 


Mrs 


CARL 
nectady 
ROY H.; 
on 
EDWARD S.: 
Gowanda. 
OHN J.; wife, Mrs. Agnes T. 
27th St., Astoria 
ILLIAM J., Jr Mrs. 
Rhinecliff 
GEORGE J.: mother, Mrs. 
New 
Mrs 


mother, 


mother, 


mother, 


gt 
ott, 1130 Tremont Ave., 
DENNIS J 
nald, Hamilton 
PHILIP J mother 

1319 Bradford Ave 


ig mother, 
Mrs. 
ti New 


wife, Mrs. Catherine 
New York 

Pt BENJAMIN J.: 
navich, Amsterdam, 
IWARD F father 


er 


JOHN 
St 


mother, 
James J 


N father, Joseph 
ester 

GUY H mother, Em- 
New Rochelle } 
HOWARD I father, Edward 
1 University | 
t NICHOLAS G friend, 
152 Webster Ave., | 


Mrs. 


mother, Mrs 


J 


Mrs 


t. KENNETH J.: 


Gen 





R father, Robert 
NJAMIN M mother, 
Long Beach 
ANCIS M sister 
rth Tonawanda 
NICHOLAS C 
llo, 204 Middleton 


Mrs Fran- | 


Mrs 
Brook- 


wife 
St 
xt. EDWARD R.: mother, Mrs 
114-14 148th St., Jamaica 
OHN M.: sister, Mrs. Mildred 
73d St Brooklyn 
apt LOUIS M.; 
ky, Hudson 
STEVE 
ectady 
THOMAS 
Albany 
mother, 


wife, Mrs 


wife, Mrs. Athena 


F., 


Mrs 


Jr.; father, | 
lan 


N J.; Grace Nole, 


Mrs 
New 


mother, 
Ave., 


H 
Morris 


IRVING 
man, 13555 
T.: father, Robert E 
Long Island City 
P Jt 

Macdougal 


| 
wife, 
St 


SALVATORE 
Nuclfora, 95 
LOUIS I wife, Mra. Mat 


Riverhead 
mother, 


ger 
Mrs. John} 


AWRENCE O.; mother, Mrs, 
Hilton 
Lt. MARTIN M wife, 


Connell, 730 Lexington 


n 
Mrs 
Ave.,| 
Sadie 


JOHN J Mrs 


4ist St 


mother 
Brooklyn 

mother, Mrs 
9th St., Queens Viilage 
DOMINGO R half brother, 
ll W. 65th St New York 
RNARD wife, Mra. Marjorie 
raide Dr New York 

FRANK J.; father, Frank J 
7 120th St Richmond Hill 
CHARLES: mother, Mrs. Mary 
1amton 
HN 8.; sister 
i1ton Ave, Bronx, 
c. NORMAN J.; 
Glens Falls 
Capt. FRANK 
ecchia, 1718 Sist St 
ANTHONY A 
Rochester 
mother, 


Rose 


Mrs. Mary Doli- 
N. ¥ 
wife, Mrs 
J.: wife, Mrs 
Brooklyn 
mother 
Pascuzzi 
JOSEPH 
19th St Astoria 
GEORGE H Jr. 
Persing, Painted Post.} 
LOUIS R.; wife. Mrs. Sara L 
dams P!., Bronx, N. Y 
PETER; father, Lawrence 


EDWARD T->; 
98 Taft Ave.. New Brighton. 
HARLES J.; wife, Mrs. Agnes 
St., Ozone Park 
mother, Mra, Edwige 
New York 
JAMES B mother 
nh, 348 12th St Brooklyn 
ELO A father, Sabatino Pica, 
Jamaica 


Mrs. Mary 


wife 





Solvay 


mother, Mrs 


Ash Ave., 


Mrs 


Cox, 


EGAN 

erine Egan 

EMANUE 

Lore Er 

EMENGER, 
or 


GIMA, 


RICE 


PINTAB 
Joseph 
PINTI 


Joseph 


| PORVAZNIK 


Helen 
PRIBBL 


Mae Pribbie 


PRICE 
B 
PROCOF 
Rosar| 
PUMILI 


PURDUE 
Marion 


RAPIN 
Rapin 


RICHARDSON, T/5g. RALPH 
470 10th 


Pfc 
resa Pinti 
POMPIL 


Price 
"10, 


ONA, Pik 
ine 
QUINT 
Rome 
Pvt 

Pompilt 


IO 
A 


Porvaznik 
E. Pvt 


Pic 

35-37 
Pvt 

» Pullano 

O, Pic 


Pvt 
B. Purdue 
Pic 


Ist Sgt 


AN 


Pintabona 


Us 


0 


JAMES L 


Ogdensburg 


Ellen Richardson 


RIVIN, Pfc 


Rivin, 
SKOCZ 

Skocz 
SMITH 

Smith 


SMYRSKI, 


Thoma 


Mrs. Josephine | smyTHE 


SOBEL, 
Sobel 


York 


father,|SPENCER Sgt 
Rose B. Spencer 
Mrs.|SPORTIELLO, Sgt 
Rose S 
Mrs. | STRAUS 
Theresa Strauss 
wife,| STRICKER. Pvt 
Stricker 
AN, Pfc 


SUND) 
Vesta 
N. ¥ 


SZYMANSKI, Pfc. ALOIS 
Szymanski, 
| TALERICO, S/Sat 


234 Crystal 
T/4 
Buffalo 


BERNARD D 


St 


ALBIN 
Corp. PETER J 


Poughkeepsie 


tc 
s Smyrski 
T/Se 


Cor 


Southampto 


mother,/SPARACO, Pfc 
Jennie Sparaco, 2031 


EDWARD F 
Syracuse 
CIRO 
237 Wyckoff St 
ALFRED 5 
Floral Park 
LOUIS _J 


rtiello, 
Set 


58 Sth A 


Sundman, 


Talerico, Utica 


TAMPONE, T/3e 


Phylis 
Y 


TARDO, 
Tardo 


TOMLINSON, Corp. AUBREY 


Kather 
maica 


TORTORIGI 
Rita Tortorigi., 
TRALONGO 
Joseph Tralongo, 8674 lith Ave 
HERBERT 


TRIMM, 


Tampone 


Pfc 
622 Bergen 


Tomilins 


Pfc 


ine 


ech 


Pvt 


THOMAS 


Eas 


WALTER 
Emma Smythe, 600 Academy 5t 
ALLEN 


Dn 


THONY 
Buffalo 
J mott 


ROBERT J 


Yonkers 


STEPHEN T.; 
Oswegatchie 
JAMES C 
Ogdensburg 
BARRETT 
78th 
FRANCIS V 
Syracuse 
FRANK 
lina Pumill®, Huntington Statior 
WALLACE 
Middletown | 
brother 


St 


mothe 


F 


J 


moth 


mother 
Jackson Heights 


Ave 
mothe: 


wife 
Ma 


ser, Mrs. The 
M 


. 


mother, Mrs 


wite, Mrs goluls 


| WOODARD 


Wood 
YANIR 
Lillian; niro 
| ZECHE 
in-law, | jenni 

| ZELINS 


ver, Mrs. Helen | 


Mrs 
father 
r. Mrs. Angel 


Mrs. | KILIAN 
Killa 


an 


Lawrence 


LASKO 


nother, Mrs 
New York j 
Mrs. Bella 


Lasko 


Brooklyn 


J 
aunt 

J 
Eg 


t Islip 


Vv 


MINICK J 


ve 


702 


Buffalo 


G 


wi 
Brooklyr 


LAWRENCE 6B 
139th 


E 


wife 


JOSEPH A 


VICTOR 


201 


PAT R 


St 


on 


H 
0 Hobart 
mother 

Brook! 


150-30 


ORAZIO D 


Ossining 
Sth 


r. JO 


L 


Grace T. Besaw, Winthrop 


VERHEY. 
Martha Bartlett. 
VICSIK, Pfc. ROBERT A 


Moriches 
Pic. JOSEPH E.; 


Lackawanna 
Asiatic 
CASIMIR F.; 


Mrs 
sik, 


ZICCARELLI 


Ziccare’ 


BILAS, Pic 


Bilas, 


CURCIO, 


Leo, 


Eliza-| MATTESON Pvt 
Augusta Matteson, Attica 
GEORGE 


McCART 


McCarthy, 94-39 86th Rd 
FRANK N 
Atlantic Ave 


SAPIO, 
Fred S 

SCINTO, 
Scinto 


THOMAS 
Eva Thomas, 


ALBANO, Pic 


Pvt 


li, 


Lackawanna 
Pvt 


HY, Capt 
Pfc 
ica, 944 
Pvt. JOHN 
Port 


ra 


gelina T. Albano, 


AMBROSIA, 
Millie C. Ibelli, 203 Gold St., 
ANNICARO, Pfc 


T/Segt 


ARTHUR 


FRANK D 
Curcio, 406 Bradford St 
HOFFMAN, Pvt 
D. Hoffman, Ossining 
KLOHCK, Pic 
| E. Kiohck, 
Elinor|LEO, Pvt. CHARLES H.; mother, Mrs Angeline 
Niagara Falls 
NORRIS D 


ROBERT C 


THOMAS W 
Johnstown 


J 


Chester 
RICHARD 
Lee Center 
Central Pacific Area 
GEORGE J 
1049 66th St, 


1 
J 


O'Neil; 


caro, 215 E. 108th St 
CHARLES 


BAIGNOSCHE, 
Loretta Baignosche, 
JOHN 


Mrs 


BALDINI, 


Pic 


fc 


F 
Rocheste 
fati 


Area 
moth 


wi 


f 
bf 


f 


mother 


H.; 


OHN J 


father 


New York 


Scher 


S.; moth 


mella B. Lesso, Corning 


BENNETT, Pvt 
Bennett 


F 
BERNYS 


Caroline 


BETTS 


Pvt 
Bernys 
Pvt 


Rochester 


Black 


BOLIVAR 
Carmen Rovira 


BRAUN, 


A. Braun 
CAPOBIANCO 
Anthony 


CARELL 
Carelli, 


CASTELLI, 
Carmella J 


Mrs. 


North 
Pvt 


S/Set 
Pic 


I, S/Set 


CHARLES G 
832 67th 
JOSEPH J 


Buf 


JOSEPH F 


Capobianco, 
JOHN 


Hoosick Falls 


« 
5 


Tech 


New York 


CESTONE, Pfc. MICHAEL | 
Rochelle 
JOSEPH 
Syracuse 
FRANK J 


J. Cest 


CHILIMSKI, 
Catherine Chilimski 
CIERECK, Pfc 


Clereck 
COHEN, 
G 


Beskowitz, 
COLLINS, 


one, New 
Pvt 


, Syracuse 

Pvt 
4514 
Pi 


Binghamton 
CONN, Pfc. JAMES S.; 


Conn 


CONNOL 


Holcomb 
LY, Pt 


New York 


COOPER 
Cooper 


COTTONE 
Cottone, 


Mary 


M. Cox 


CURLEY, 
Anna Curley, 


City 


CURRY 
Dooley 


ral 


DILEO, 


Glen © 


DONNAN, 
Donnan 
DONZA, 


cetta 


Sophie 


Emenge 
FALERO 
Falcro, 


FELDMAN 
Feldman 
Brooklyn 


lian 
way 


FELPO, 


Aniello 


| FITSIMMONS 
Katherine 


Ist 


Donza, 
DRYWINGA, 


Pvt 


, Pvt. Eli 


JOHN 


th 


Castelli, 


MORRIS 


1 
J 


A. 


Poughkeepsie 


Pic 


Lt 
179 W 
Pie 


45-2 


Pic 
Avon 
Pfc 
ove 
Pvt 
Sonyea 
Pfc 


JO} 


Pfc 
M 


484 8 
L, Pfe 
nanuel, 
Pfc 
30-11 41s 
Pfc 
536 Fox St 
Ist Lt 


S/Set 
Felpo, 
Pfc 


New York. 


FOGLIANO, 


gelina 


FRANKLIN, 
Franklin, 
GAILHARD, S/Set 
Annie A 
GENTILE, Pte. 
Gentile, 

T/5g¢ 


Mrs 
Lena 


Gima, 


GOULD, Pfc 


Gouid, 
Hill, L 


Mary Ff 


KARAFA, Pfc 
45 Washington 
KATZ, Pfc 


Katzer, 


KEENE, Pvt 


Pie 
Mollica, 
Pvt 


73- 


Yonkers. 
Middletown 


yons Falls 


HOCHHEISER, Pvt 
Hochheiser, 
HOGAN, 


S/Set. 


logan, Mou 


St 


* 
i) 


MAURICE J 
PHILIP 


IN; 


MICHAE! 
216 Withers 
FRANK 
Drywinga, 206 7th St., 
THOMAS A 


th 


DONALD 
910 Rive 
GEORGE 


ts 


JUAN 


care Solin 


ANTHONY 
Huntington 
THOMAS 
Fitzsimmons, 


FRANK J 


17 
EL 


238 8th Ave 


ELROY 


GOYETCHE, Pfc. PETER R 
evieve L. Goyetche, 4020 Avenue D, Brooklyn. 
HILL, T/4g. BERNARD A 


SAMUEL 
Greenport 
GEORGE 


nt 


STEVE; 


St Broo 


falo 
father 


|BLACK, Pfc. DONALD J.: mother, 
Tonawanda 
ARMANDO 
606 W 
EDWARD C 
1878 Stockholm 
SALVATORE J 


J 
t 


St 


Cheev 
WwW 


46 
Gr 
234 
J 
F: 
fz 
mothe: 


Ave 
father, 


ith 


mother 


MARTIN J 
Catherine Connolly, 1001 Summit Ave 


wife, M 


LEONARD; 
Rochester 
WILLIAM F 

1024 St 
FRANCIS 
Davis 


wile 
New 
Xx 
St 


father 
mother 


J.; mot 
St 
G 

mothe 

St 

Ww 


side 


D 
moth 
t 
Ne 
9720 
F 
T 
2331 
sis 
19th 
IWARD 
New 


Mam 
Pp 


sister, 
M.: wife 
wi 


fat! 


ws 
Kisco 
sister, 


. New York 


ABRAHAM 
378 Pennsylvania Ave., 


KATZER, Pvt. HAROLD N 


father 


2095 Grand Concourse 


HARR 


195 Bedford Ave 


KELLEHER, Pvt 
Kelleher, 1847 Bathgate Ave., 
RAYMOND 
544 W 
THOMAS 
> WwW 


J 


KENNEY 


Mabel 


KILLEEN 
McGrath 
KURZINSKY 
Kurzinsky 
WILLIAM 
205th 
THOMA B 
Annie Leonard, 838 Park PI 
DAVID: bre 
Raymond's Ave., 
JOSEPH P 


317 


Mary 
ham 
KUSCH 

E 


| LEVINE 


vine 


|LOVAGI 


Grazia 


| MACKIEWICZ 


Sophie 


| MANCUSO 
Mancuso 


MELNIK 
Melnike 


MESTRE 
Frances Moralez 
MILiTO, 


Milito 


MILLARD, 


H. Mil 
MOENIU 


Moentus, 


MOORE 


Elizabeth 


MORAG! 
Grace 
MORRIS 
Rose \N 
MOSES 


Elsie Moses 
MURRAY 
Margaret 
PARKER 
Cypress St 
Pvt 


i751 


149 E 


|ROMM 


V. Rot 


| SANDER 
| Sanders 
SANTOPADRE 


| ©. Kusch 
LEONARD 


1075 St 


Moragliia 


Pic 
Kenney 
5/Set 
34 
Pfc 
5, 
Pi 

0-13 
Pr 
S/Sat 
10 


Pri 
agli 
Pfc 
Mackiewicz 
S/Set 
1659 
Pfc 
1960 


te 


75t 
ER 


Tr 78t 


vt 
Lyve 
Pte 
lard, 150-41 
Pie 
1T2A 
Pvt 
Moore 
Pvt 


AA 
1) 
S/Set 
forris, 
T/Sgt 


Coho 


95 
S/Set 
P 
Pvt 


Mur 


LEON 


STEPHE 
126th St 
Pt 
nh 
Ss, 


712 
Corp 
Ithaca 
lst 


Louls Santopadre 


SCHINZEL 
Anna M 


SCHOR 


652 Co 


SHULMAN, 
Shulman 


SMITH 
P 

SMITH 
B. Pur 

SPAULD 
Alice 


VEGA, 
Vega, 

VERLOC 
Carrasc 


Agnes 

lyn 
VITKEV 

Stella 
WALTEI 


Mildred Walters, 1 


Y 


New 


WARR 


Warren 
WASNIC 


G. Wa 


WEBLER, Sgt 

Josephine P. Webler, care McDonough, 967 
Brooklyn 
Pi 
Weinbrenner, 1219 Wheeler Ave 


40th 


New 


Wenzel 


Smith 


Spaulding 

UNDERHILI 
cis Underhill 

Pfc 


0 


VISNIAUSKA 


M 


EN, Pi 


St 
WEINBRENNER 
Raffelia C 
York 
WEISINGER 
Welsinge 


WENZEI 


Pi 
ScMinze! 
Pfc 
ster St 
Pvt 
Rocheste 
T/dg. BARI 
S/Sgt 
jell 
ING 


Herkin 
Pt 


Pvt 


JOSEP! 
Fleet 
Pi 
38 


5 


K 


Corr 
Bochiochio 
ICH, Corp 
Vitkevicl 
tS. Pf 
] 


ork 


Rochester 
K, Pfc 
snick 


Set 
T 305 
Pvt 
31-59 14th 


Bir 


Y 


brother 


New York 


JOHN 


AB 
$6 


A? 
B 
AN 


h 


° 


GEORGE 
Conklin 
CLARENCE J 
Rochester 


LEC 
Ss 


EDWARD 


es 


BERTRAM 
Christoy 
RAYMOND 


ray 
‘ 


Cypress 


JOHN 


I 
Pou. 


RUDOLPH 
Stephentown 
ERNEST 

New 
MELVIN 


t 


_£& 


WRIGHT 
Alb 
RICHARD F 
Binghamton 


Walk 
PAUL; 
Garden 


114 
vik 
1, 1 


JOHN E 


METRO 
Binghamton 
HOWARD E 


St 
NATHAN 


St 


Jip J 
J 
1624 S 
s 
21st 
RAHAM 
Hopkinso 
J 


St 


Ss 


B 


the 


E. 102d S 
YTHONY 
uffal 


GELO f 


Bre 


MARCELLO 
625 Marcy / 
EMILIO 


broth 


f 
th Ave., 


Ir 
Ave., 


YARD 


tarr St 


G 
oO 


uw 
Ww 


fat 


father 


Monterey 


Mrs 


J.3 
Yates 


Brooklyn 


father 

Woodhaven 
sister- 
Brooklyn 


mother 


N 


father, 


137th St 


HEN 


father 


sister 


Michael 


Brooklyn 


Astoria 
friend, Mr 
Bronx 

HERBERT 


wife 


Ave 
York 
CHARLES E., 
Gailhard, 
ANTHONY 
123 Garfield Pi 


JOHN; Miss 


father, 


Mrs 


Brooklyn 
father 


st 


Brooklyn 


ier St 


er Joseph 
ALE 
Miss Elizabeth Jose; 
Jf father Altsct 
AMBR( 
Alice 
ANTON 
Anton 


wife Mrs 
New York 
Staniey 


ARCHIELLO 


mother, Mrs 


Ave 


Grace 


( 
Mrs lara 


mother 

mother Mrs 
Brooklyn 

mother Mrs 


BARON 
J 
BATTE 


fe, Mrs. Louis). 
’ 
mother 


St 


Natali 
City 


Mrs 
Bronx 
G 


Mrs. Carmela 


father, John 


Bronx 
WOLFE 


Mrs | WESLOWSKI 
Weal 
WIESTENHAEFER 
Ther 


F 
N 


ard 
oO 
445 
R 
eZ 


‘KI 


ine Zelinski 


¥ 


n 


' 


45 


310 
© Ale 
ALTSCHULER 


Mule 
SE 
An 


Pt 


Pt 
Flor 
Pvt 


ter 
ten 


wak 


Whe 
York 
JACOB 
aroneck 
Sgt. LEW 
Holcomb 
Pvt JOHN 

Lin 
Pt 
chet 
Pt 


esa 
ew 
te 
far 


Lowvi 


134 17th 


South Pacific 


( 


‘pl. ROBER 


racuse 


Southwest Pacific Area 
mother, 


af 


MICHAE 
Broadway 


oln Ave 


CHARLES W 
FRANK 


CONRAD V.: 


ida 

JOSEP 
haefer 
sister, 
Is D 
mother 
lle 


Pp 
St 


mo 


Ar 


T C 


LP 


Water 


Mrs 


Brooklyn 


Brooklyn 


mother 


Mrs. ' 
| 


mother 


H PETER 
176 E. 165th 


wife, 
St., 


Esther Mar- 


father, Jesse G | 


Mrs. Anna Ya-/ 


mother Mrs 


ther, Mrs. Paul- 


ca | 


Mrs. J./ 


Mrs. Ida 


tions to List of Casualties as Reported by War Department 


Mrs. Mary 


POLITO, Pvt. PAUL M.; mother, 
Polito, Nutley 
PRUSINOWSKI, Pvt. TONY E.; 
Bertha Prusinowski, Kearny 
RAPOLE, Sgt. JOHN S.; mother, Mrs 
beth Rapole, Franklin 

RECK, Pvt. WILLIAM K.; mother, Mrs 
garet Reck, 121 Storms Ave., Jersey City 


| RUSSO, Pfc. NICHOLAS: father, Frank Russo, 


Plainfield 
SHASHAK, Pvt. HENRY B.; 
Lyndhurst 


Anna Shashak 

SMITH, Pfe. JOSEPH J.; father, Adam Smith, 
Rockaway 

|SMITH, Pvt. THOMAS E.; mother, 
Smith, Keansburg 

STEELMAN, Cpl. ALONZO R.; 
Dorothy R. Steelman, Camden 
SWORDS Pfc. FRANCIS J 
Alice Swords, 859 Garfield Ave., 


mother, 


mother, Mrs. 
Mrs. Helen 
Mrs. 
Mrs 


wife, 


mother, 





vilet 


NEW JERSEY 


Furepe 
TM AN 


Pvt 
Flemingt« 
Pvt 

ibrose 


Bloom 


Elizabet! 


Ar 


New | ARMSTRONG 


M 


| ATKINS 
Atkins 


F 
bk 


Barone 


Batten 
BRANCIFORTE 


e 


BROWNE 
Bre 
CANTAZARO 

Elizabeth 


wr 


CLAYTON 


Mrs I 


Bronx 


mother 
Ave 
M. Cr 
CSAK 
(San 
CUDWI 


Ermelinda 


yn 
M 


Ja C1 
CUMM 


Edna 


wife 
Rd 
wife, Mrs 
SEPH: father a 
Brooklyn | DAVIS 


mother Mrs.| Davis 


dwor 


Clayton 
COLLINS 


au 


Ea 
RT 


Hi 


F 
A 


| DICENZO 


grandmother im 


r 


rer Pamo 


Rudy Vic-| 


| DIOTTAVIO 
Emidio Diottavio 


father, Eugene | 


Dicenzo 
| DIDOMENICO 


na 


DIPALMA, 


Dipalr 
DIPIPP 


Mrs. Anna Dipips 


er 


na, 
0 
m0, 


DOBRAN 


fe, Mrs. Jean bran 


ather, Charlies 


Pt 
chielk Bayo 
Corp 
Armstron 
Pvt 
toselle 
Pvt. JOHN 
East Oran 
r/Sg GEOR( 
Pvt 
Branciforte 


Sgt 
we Sr 
Sgt 
Cantazaro 
2d Lt. WAL 
Tenafly 
Pt 
t 
st 


H 


Absecon 
Brunswick 
Pfc JOR 

Gien Ridg 
Set 

J. Seully 
Essex 

>yt 

tiantic City 

Pic 

Boonton 
Pfc 

Dedomenico 

S/Set 


Pvt 
West 

T/4g 
Garfield 
Pvt 


PETE 


Burlington 


DUNDAS 
Ellen Dundas, 


ELLISON 


ather, Chester Ellisor 


ESPOSI 


ESTELI 
Estelle 
FARRA 
Virglr 


mother, Mrs 


Michael 


n-law, Mrs 
| FRANK 
Mildred | wea be 


Mrs 


Sgt 
294 Va 


Pvt. JOHN 


1, Elizabeth 


TO 


Mary Esp 


E 


Pyt 
it 
Pfc 


Bayon 
HAROL 


Belleville 


NI 
la 


FEDORCHAK, Cp! 
Fedorchak 


O 


S/Sgt 
Farrant, 
JO! 

Passaic 
Sgt 


DONALD R 


DAVID 


EDWARD 
Bogota 
JOSEPH 
Elizabeth 
THOMAS §,; 


WILLIAM 


THOMAS 

‘ Belleville 
| DADDARIO, Pvt. DANIEL P.; wife, Mrs. Helen 
Daddario 
JOHN J.; 


THOMAS N.; 


GEORGE; 


ANTHONY 


BENJAMIN 


an Area 
GELO 


“liffside 


FRANZ 
n 


VINCENT E 


field 
w 


JOSEPH 


nné 


JAMES V 
Cranford 


moth 


F 
e 
EW 


Hurffville 
ALFRED 
Van 


224 


M 


TER A 


A: 
IN J.; 


ALFRED; mother, 
Paterson 
SALVATORE A 
Camden 
mother, 


R 


New York 
TONY A.; 


wife 


ALOYSIUS F.; 


rick St 
A.; fat 


M 
ne 


-D; wife 


MELVIN J.; 
Montclair 


iN; mot 


Franko, Perth Amboy 


FRISBEE 


mother, Mrs.| ; wept 


GOLDBERG 
Goldberg 


| HANAWAY 


Mr An- 
Brooklyn 
Sister, Mr 
ew York 
Frank Anni 


Fran 
| JOHNS( 
Johns 
| JONES 


abeth 


5 


H mother 
rectady 


er, Mrs 


Henni 
KOPEC 
Kopec 


KOR! 


Car- 


Nathan 
klyn 


mother, KOSAK 


J t 
LE 


Mrs 


George Betts 
LIEE 
Mrs 
sister, Mrs. | QDER 

et 


New York. | 3,,.- 
Edward | MAZZA 


Wlazza 


Mr Helen 


ather 
Brooklyn 
father 
Bklyn 
Frank 


er Pl 


father, Me 


OLSEN, 


wife, ; 
Olsen 


St 


RY A.: 
E. 116th 


Thomas 


Peters 


mother, Mrs 


Pollio, 
PRIOR 

Elizab 
PYCH 


ather, Stanley | 

Mrs. Freda/| 
Brooklyn | 
John Collins, | 


Winifred 


REID 
Reid 
| ROGI 


Rog 


Mrs 


Mrs 
Bronx, 


mother 


Laver! 
ROSE 

Mrs 
RUSSO 

Mary 


Evelyn M 


rs 


mother, Mrs 
Mrs 

York 

mother 
Long 


velyn 
Bvel; B 
Mrs 


Island Walter 


SMITH 


erine 


Mrs. Mae 


*|) PERSON 
bara Per 
| PETERSON 


|} POLLIO 


1 F 


es 
IN, 
on 
Pf 
Jo 


KENNEDY, Pik 


ng 


Pvt 
Walll: 
GUT 


lie Korngu 


O\ 
line 


MANSKI 
NSAl 
3ERMA} 
Josep 


F 
B 
F 


Sat 
risbee, Ather 
Pic. Mort 
93 Avon 
Pvt 
Hanaway, Ya 
Pic. KBNN 
Glen Rife 
c. EDWARD 
nes i7l 


FRED 


GEORGE 


Ave 


H.; 
ila 


on mot 


rdville 
ETH G. 


T.; mo 


srunswick St., 


J.; mot 


mother, 


mother 


father 


mother, 


wife, Mrs 


wife, 


Fe3 


Newark 
LAWRENCE C.: 


mother Mrs 


fathe: Henry 


wife, Mrs 


life. Mrs. Marie 


mother Mrs 


mother, Mrs 


er, Mrs. Sarah 


Mrs. Sarah 


father, Herbert 





Mra 
Jersey 


J wife 
Horne, 


father, Weldon 
mother, Mrs 
father, Walter 
Mrs. Eva 
father, Charlies 
John B 
sister, Mrs 
Mrs. Jane 
Marie 
Mrs 
father, 
Mrs. Anna 
Mrs. Nancy 
Zita Do- 
mother, Mrs. 
Jersey City 
her, George H. 


Mrs. 


. Mrs. 


; mother, 


. Mrs. Anne R 


] 
wife, Mrs. | 


her, Mrs. Anna 
Mrs 
Mrs 


Molly 


mother, 
mother, 
her, Mrs 
mother, Mrs. 
F. 
ther, Mrs. Eliz- 
Newark 
Mrs. Stella 





A.; father, 


her 


118 Norwood St., Newark 


ADAM 
igton 
Set 
790 Clin 
Set 
Kosakow 
Pvt 
Sth 
Pfc 


e 


5. 
! 
Ss} 


J 


<I 
207 St 
n 

>¢ 


Loder 


vt 


Hillside 


MERCIER, 
Mercier 
MESSENGER 


Fe 


on 


H 


Pvt 


eth 
Set 


171 Seventh 


Pic 


sob 


Pfc 


Pvt 
Sout! 
Pfi 


enger, Linden 
Pfc 


ALBERT 
rds 
Major ARTH 
Madison 
Pic. LEON 
Trenton 
JOSEPH 
ackensack 
THEODO 
M. Prior, 
JOHN §S 
St., Jerse 
LAWRENC 


Englishtown 


tS, 


Pvt 


Burlington 


| ROSENTHAL 


YTHAL, T 


Esth 


R 


SAMCHUK, 
Samchuk 
SCHAFFER 


I 


PI 


sm 


SOHNLE, |! 


Dileo, | _ °° 
SOKOI 
Sokol 


Mrs. Emily 


SOKOLOWSKI 
Sokolowsk I 
ARNOLD R 


ver, Mrs. Con Anna 


Brooklyn 

sister Miss 
New York 
Mrs. Cath- 


A { 
STAMP‘ 
r Mrs 
mother Mrs 
New York 
Mrs. Clara TV 


r 
er 
ED 
Magdalena | 
York 
Mrs 
Kings 


WADE 
Wade 
WAER 
Brown 
WALLA 
jen 
AIGUIF 


a 
Lil- 
High- 


mother, Mrs 


Mrs 
Ave., 


nother 
Gleason 
ATTAN 

Mrs. An Mary 
New York 


father, Joe} 


ter, 


garet 
BELI 
mother,| czabeth 
| BITTNE 
Lillie 
OLZ 
E 
ORDU 


duin 


Jr 
aroneck 
mother, Mrs 
Brooklyn 
Olga 


lB 


gE! 
|B 


. Mrs. Vivian! 


Gwiad 
CAHILI 
Cahill 


fe. Mrs Gen- 


ier, Henry A 


Joseph | ©. Ca 
frs.| . Lorett 
Mrs. | GHEBU 


Chebu 


mother, 
Sue Peles 
, Max Katz 


Samuel 
Bronx, N. Y./| “ 
Albert Keene, | PEROO 


Deroos 
DILAL( 
| Dilalo 
| DREN 

Marie 
|} FLACK 


~ 


Corrt 


father, John} 
Bronx, N. Y¥ 
mother, Mrs 
t.. New York 
aunt, a jellie 
New York.| prc; 
father, Abra ty 3A Rt 
Ave Bklyn 7 
» Mr Ruth 


Rena 
n Mrs HAND 
rc Al 
HECK 


Oklyn 
Bro HEGEL 
M 
HESSNI 


I 


BECKER 


CARTER 


aro 
GRESSMAN 


Sohnle, 


I 
Pe 


SPARBY 
INE 

Mary 

SURACH 


rach 


cl 


Py 


”) 


Pvt. WILSON E 
Market 
JAMES 


1 
CE 


Wallace 


R 


Alguier 
ASI 
Atta 
Pvt 


Pvt 
Ada Tweed 


Pfc 
Rosenthal 
Sgt 


er Rosentha 


vt. STE 
Millville 
THE 
Schaffer 


Sxt 


ith, Tenafly 
P GEORGE 
94 Morris Av 
vt MELVID 
rth Amboy 


Pie 


ntic C 
Stamp ne 
Pvt. GABRI 
PETER A 
fton 

CHARL 
Turners 
MARTIN 
Thire 


t 
0} A 
74 W 
Pic 
306 Fig? 
Pvt 
Westfield 
», Pvt 
NAasio 


JOSEPH 


AN 


S.; 


EMANUEL; wife, Mrs 
tom Ave., 
JOSEPH J 


LEON P.; 


FRED 
Plainfield 
EDWARD; 


Atlanth 
mother, Mrs. Eva Pych, | ANDRYZECK, Pvt 


HARRY 0O.; 


EDWIN M 
Milford Ave., 
WILLIAM 
l. Atlantic City 
RUDOLPH 
Jersey 


88 


EDGAR 


169 New 


wife 


ski, Baye 
la 


Jersey C 


WILLIAM A., Jr 
Liebermann, 
KIRIATH 
Pennsville 
SAMUEL A 


A.; 


O.; mot 
UR C 

T.; 
A.; 
RE A 


y City 
E; mott 


J 
City 
"HEN; 


IDORE 


Montclair 
WILLIAM C 


wi 


CW 


fa 
Newa 
siste 


‘, 


RAYMOND; mother, Mrs 
3 


nne 


ity 


THOMAS 
Wallington 


AL; mo 


Bayonne 
mother, Mrs. Eleanor 


ES 
le 
J wi 
e., Jerse 
motl 
St 


uv 
V 


H.: 


m 
St 
L 


th 


THONY 


F.; mot 


Mooney,+ Palisade 


Pvt 
j 
cR 


Bittner 


Pf« 


Eyerkuss 


IN 


MICHAEL 
Bell 
Pfc 
South 
EDWIN 


Pi ¢ 


JOHN 


Paterson 


ys 


1201 
2d Lt 


te 


CATHCART 
Bigge 
1IN, 


a 


nin 


COFFEY 


CORRIS 


Ww 
Ss 

r 
_ e 
LAt 


Dr 


S/Ssxt 


M 


) 


Pv 


Et 
r 


hawker 


ather HOFFM 


ste 
Brook 


er Fran 


Mronx 
FILLMORE 


nt) Cc} : 
Whitest Ce 
fathe . 1 
ee } Kt 
Brooklyn | Alt 
mother 


ENA 
a rire 
Ge 


M 
mother irs Ave 
New York ’ 
mothe M 
Mis 


sister 
Y 


New 
wife 


Carthage 


brother, I 
wokl 


n 


t! 


New York 


ALEXANDER iat 


Ave 


mother 


t MAUF 
ighkeepsle 
B 
wife, Mr 
York 
moth 


mother 


Amsterdam 
JOSEPH 


iH mot 


B 


mn 


wife Mr 
sister 

Pi Broo 

JOHN J 


South 


TOR B 
26 Bert 


HAROLD (¢ 
755 Bronxdale 


sister 


EDWARLI 


SAMUEL 


WILLIAM 


St 


Bre 
J 
Astoria 


Ave 


Brooklyn 


it} 


mother, 


IR 


farnett Parker 


b klyt 
Mrs. Paullae 


RICE fat 


Mrs +} 
LEVOC 
Levoel 


LORD 
Helen Sonal 


mother 


s. Kay Sch 


er, Mrs 


Mrs MAAI 


Nict 


MANSFIELD 


her Mrs, Eva| MON™" 
| MAROV 
bh M 
ran- | MAR 
K 


mother, Mrs 


f 


father, } 


s Carmen E 
Mrs 
klyn 
Sister 

St B 


Elizabeth | MI ai 


( 


mother 
I 


mother N 
Ave Bri 


nx 


Miss Kathileet 


Mrs. Anne 


wife, Mr 
R 


ILI 


Mrs.| _ tilio 


E 


) wife 


Petr 
| PFISTE 
Ada |! 
PICCIA 
Mary 


faiher, Warry 
wklyn 


father Philip 


Bertha cabal 


ANN 


Ab 


ide 


LEY 
e Ke 


KENDZIERSKI, 1 


Ma 


K 


LEPORE, Pf 


H 


Set 
Rive 


cu 


‘ 


VSK 
srowsh 
HALI vt 
Maraha scotch Pi 
McDONALD 


Isabella 


ana 


Pt 
he 

{) 

we 


| PETRILLO 
ill 


R 
fl 
WO 


Pk 


zB 
Pic 


Randolph 
West Sid 


Teaneck 
Pvt 
Vinela 
Pvt 
Trenton 


T/4g 


JOSEP! 
New Yor 
FRED 


Pic 
est 
Pfc 
lifton 
‘orp 

ew 


JOHN 
Brunswic 
Sgt 
entiau 
BRI 

Flack 
Pic LOUIS 


Belleville 


Ist L 
n. V 


RLE 


Gressn 
t CHA 
Hand 
HOWARD 
West En 


< Hegele 


CHAR 
474 


mans 
ISEPt 
Voodb 
FREDEI 
Ward, New 
HAROLD 1} 
Set EDW 
M. Keenatr 
Pt cl 
lley 


a 
rianna 
ey Cit 
CHARLES 
ade P 
HEN 
field 
JOSE! 
‘ Wall 
Lt 


Pa 


\NDREW 


DOMIN 


JOUN 


“I Sgt. WILL 


n 
JOHN 
yore Ur 
Atk 
VINCENT 
ake 

ALK Pvt 
Maarachalk 
sat 
Nint? 
¥ vt OO 
y. 62 Belts 
jou 


ROD 
onald, P 
i 


i . 
rkei, Fl 


vi 


ti 31 


Yard 


ck 


DENIS 


N tl 
STEF 
ki, I 
ANI 
nitl 12 Wi 
WALLACE 
son, East 
S/Set. JO 
ymfield 
ARDI 


O'BIin 


Pt 


Blo« 
Pvt 
West New 
T/S5¢e. ROB 
ter Irvingtor 


North 


Ww 
Belleville 


JAMES 


MIC 


WILLIAM 
Anastatia Coffey, 10 Bay Side Pl., 


JOHN 


Eliz 


Kearn) 


KARI 


ARENCE 
Harrison 


ue Ci 
I FRANK J 


SEPH 


Y 


J mother 
Kearny 
GEORGE 


E 
Bound 
motl 


father 


|BURKHALTER. T/5g JOHN H 
Pennington 


5.* 
e Ave 


JAMES C., Jr.; 
ROBERT L.; 


nd 
HAEL; 


J: 


| wife 


n 
mothe 


J 


k 


mot 
Pp: 
) 


abet! 
mothe 


J 


ROBERT 


neland 
B 


i 
R 
WOOK 


LES 


Gregory 


F 
Clifton 
{1 JR 
idge 
LICK I 
Brunsw 
I wife 


ARD P 
GC, louce 


KE 


cl 


A fatl 


mother 


HC 
Jr 
motl 


ICK, ef 


| al 
*sskill 

IAM; m« 
G mot 


ty 
m 
mot 


J.; 


WILLIA 
Glen Ri 


PAUL |} 


st Jer 
iN 
nont 


AV 


nine 
VALD 


SAIC 


J 
a 
E 

rabeth 
EPHEN 


mother 


rst 
LIAM R 
ensack 


N 


M 
"er Ar 
IREW J 
llow Ave 


"HEN 


C.; mother, Mrs. Mar¥| pOMENICK, Corp. LOUIS 


ige 


Camden 


wife, 


mother, 


mother, Mrs 


mother, Mrs 


c 


father, 


father, 


wife, Mrs 


sister, 


York Ave 


father. 


[MENT 
Kendziersk! 


wife 


, Mrs, Stefana 
Mal- 
Newark 
mother, Mrs, | 
ynne 
ther, 
ity 


Peter Le- 

mother, 
mother, Mrs. 
Mrs, Lucy 
Mrs. Laura! 
father, Harry 


her, Mrs. Anna 


wife, Mrs. Bar- 





Mary 
Laura 


wife, Mrs | 


Sr.; 
ity 


ler, Mrs. Anna 


Leon W 
wife, Mrs 
Newark 
M mother, 


mother, Mrs. | 
} 
| 


Andrew 
L 


; aunt, Mrs 


Mrs 


ther, George C 
rk 


fe, Cath- 


Miss Sarah 


Ruth 
mother, 


Mrs 


J.; 


ther, Ro- 





mother, Mrs. | 
fe, Mrs. Mary} 
y City | 
ver, Mrs. Mary | 


Newark } 


other, Mrs 
Jersey City 
Miss 


Ruth | 
' 
mother, Mrs. | 
Newark 
Mrs. Mar- | 


El!- 


her 
Mrs 


mother, Mrs 
Brook 

rer, Mrs. Elsie 
William Bor- 


aunt, Mrs 
Michael 
Jersey City 

father, James | 





|F 


mother, Mrs 


father, Joseph | 


mother, Mrs. | 


Jersey 


Mrs. Theresa! 


r, Mrs. Wilma | 


her, Mrs. Susie 


Mrs 


mother 


mother, Mrs 


r M: Julia 


* 


s wife, Mrs 


mother Mrs 





Mr Mary 


and | 


Mrs 
Wee- 


mother M 


s 


mother Mrs 


mother, Mrs 
ick 


Mrs M 


Rose 


mother, Mrs 
ater City 

wife Mrs 
J 


417 


mother | 
Arlington | 
ver, Andrew A 


Mrs. Lydia} 


mother Mrs 


mother, Mrs 


'KUSTRA 


Mrs. Anna 


usin, John Ku 


Mrs. Mar 


ster 


yther, Mrs. Rose 


Mrs. Hya-| 


her 


yther, Mrs. Lucy 


her, Mrs. Clara 


M father, 
dge 
father 
sey City 
Mrs 
Newark 


J 
John J 


Lucille | 


wife, Mra. Mary 


mother, Mrs 


mother, Mrs 


| THAYER 


mother, Mrs 


Mrs. Car 


friend, Fran- 


Mrs. Ursula} 


mother, Mrs 
iboy 
cousin 
Hoboken 


Mrs 


| 
J father, Emil Pe- | 


H boken 


TINO 
rk 
ERT 
1 


A 


ais 


Bergen 


wife, 


Mrs. Marie/ 


mother, Mrs 


ter-in-law, Mrs 
‘ 


DUBAY, Pvt 


GLEASON, Cpl 


| SMITH, 


| TETRAULT, 


| WASCO 


| ZYGMONT, 


|MURRAY, Pfe 


SYMS. Pvt. JOHN G. Jr.; mother, Mrs. Lu- 
cille C. Syms, Ocean Grove 
TARDIF. Pvt. LAWRENCE J.;: 

trude Tardif, Elizabeth 
TOTH, ist Lt. ALFRED L.; 


Toth, Clifton 


wife, Mrs. Ger- 


father, Andrew 


Asiatic Ares 
|}GOLD, 24 Lt. FELIX N wife, Mrs 
Gold, 16 Edwin Pl.. Newark 
LAASS, Pvt. HAROLD; mother, Mrg 
Schmitz, New Brunswick 
SIMON, T/Sgt. STEVEN: mother, Mrs. Rose S 
Morrell, Fords 
TERRANOVA, Pfc. SALVATORE; mother, Mrs 
Angelina Terranova, Colonia 

Central Pacific area 


ADAMS, Pfc_ JOHN F mother 
A. Adams, East Orange 
AHERN, Set. JAMES 
Ahern, Bayonne 

BARON, S/Sgt. ANDREW R&.; 
Hedwig J. Baron, Bloomfield 
CERTO, Pfc. FRANK P.; sister 
L. Kohlep, New Brunswick 
CLARK, Pic. GEORGE G.; mother, Mrs 
Clark, Kearny 

CLARK, Pvt. RICHARD C Mrs 
beth B. Clark, Morristown 

DANIEWICZ, T/Sgr. FRANK J.: mother, 
Ludwika Daniewicz, Perth Amboy 

DAWSON, Pfc. JOHN H.; mother, Mrs 

garet Dawson, Summit 

DeMARTINO, T/Sgr. ANTHONY; sister-in-law, 
Mrs. Carmela DeMartino, 68 10th St., Hoboken 

Mrs. Agnes 
Mrs 


Ruth £.| 


Susan 


Mrs. Hester 


wife, Mrs. Julia F 


wife Mrs 
Mrs. Kathryn 
Mary 
Eliza- 

Mrs 


Mar- 


wife, 


DOWDS, Pic. JAMES A.; mother, 
Dowds, 26 Earl St.. Newark 
DREW. S/Sgt. JOHN M 
Drew, Bayonne 

DUL, Pfc. ALBERT G.; sister, Mrs. Mildred 
Swartzenback, Paterson 

FALCON, Pvt. AMILE; Rudolph C 
Falcon, Camden 

FLEISCHER, T/Sgr. ADOLPH R.; friend, Miss 
Elizabeth Kalle, Paterson 

GARBE, Pfc. WILLIAM R.; Alfred 

Mrs. 
Marie 


Garbe, Paterson. 
FRANKLIN F.; 
Mrs. 


wife Mary 


brother, 


father, 
wife, 

Mrs. 

mother, 


GATES, 24 Lt. 
wife, 


Mrs. Anna 
Mrs. Mary 
mother 
Mrs. 
mother, Mrs 
Mrs. Matilda 


Frank 


or.; 


Evelyn A. Gates, Plainfield 
GLOWACKI, T/4gr 
Passaic 
May Gumbrecht, 363 Montgomery St., Jersey 
KAYLOR, Pfc. HENRY G.; mother, Mrs. Anna 
Koziatek, South River. 
Angelina Maresca, 429 Central Ave., Jersey 
Mrs. Stella Wahl, Atlantic City 
McBRIDE, Pfc. ROBERT J.; mother, Mrs 
Merchantville 
RAIMO, Pfc. JOSEPH S.: mother, Mrs. Loulse 
Kathryn J. Ritter. Camden 
STEWART, ist Lt 
Swisewski, 58 17th Ave.. Newark 
TREMALLO, Pvt. JOSEPH F 
wife, 
Ruth A. Umstead, Yardville 
VOGEL, Pfc. FRED J.; mother, 


GENCHI, Pfc. JAMES §&.; 
Genchi, Lyndhurst 
CARL; 
Catherine Glowacki, 
GUMBRECHT, Pfc. GERARD R.; mother, Mrs 
City 
JUSIEWICZ, Pfc. JOSEPH: mother, Mrs. Mary 
Jusiewicz, Trenton 
Weber, Elizabeth. 
KOZIATEK, Pfc. THOMAS J.; father, Joseph 
MARESCA, T/Sgt. JAMES C.: mother, Mrs. 
City 
MATHEWS, S/Sgt. LEONARD M.; mother, 
MATTHEWS, Pfc. WILLARD H.; wife, Mrs. 
Mildred A, Matthews, Smithville 
Charlotte McBride, Audubon. 
MIDIRI, Pvt. PAUL; father, Joseph Midir!, 
PARR, Pfc. WALTER L.: wife, Mrs. Margaret 
D. Parr, 500 High St.. Newark. 
Raimo, 533 N. Fourth St., Newark. 
RITTER, T/4gr. ROY E., Jr.; wife, Mrs. 
SMITH, T/5g HENRY; wife, Mrs. Violet Smith, 
Riverside. 
JAMES T.: father, Samuel 
S. Stewart. Beverly 
SWISEWSKI, Pfc. PAUL: mother, 
TINO, Pvt. MICHAEL J.; mothier, 
Tino, 120 8th Ave.. Newark 
Mrs. Lena Tremallo, Madison 
UMSTEAD. T/5g RAYMOND E.: 
VALLACCHI, Pfc. ROBERT: 
Alma Vallacchi. Berflardsville 
Vogel, Belleville 
WAFKOWSKI, Pfc. DANIEL; 


father, 
Wafkowski, Clifton 
WARREN, T/3g GERARD; wife, Mrs. Josephine 


Warren, Manville 
WEEKS, Pvt. ROBERT; wife, Mrs. Elizabeth 


Weeks. 9 Watson Ave., Newark 

WEIR, Pfc. JAMES M.; wife, Mrs. Elizabeth 
L. Weir. 159 Grant Ave., East Newark. 

YOVANKIN, Pfc. JOHN; sister, Miss Bertha 


Yovankin, Maple Shade. 


CONNECTICUT 


European Area 
ALLARD, T/5g. WiLFRED A.; wife, Mrs. Mary 
G. Allard, Central Village. 
WiLLIAM; mother, Mrs 
Nose Andryzeck, Tariffville. 
ANRICO, Pic, JOSki’H J.; wife, Mrs, Catherine 
F. Anrico, South Norwalk. 
BALL, Pvt. WILLIAM H.; Mrs. Bertha 
Ball, Milford 
EMIL E.; Mrs. Anna 
Mrs. Pearl 


wife, 


BANKER Pic mother, 
M. Banker, Norwich 


BUMPS, rvt. ERNEST J.; 
Bumps, Bristol. 

CALLAGHAN, Sgt. WILLIAM J.; mother, Mrs. 
Katherine Callaghan, New Haven, 

CHANDLER, Pfc. RUSSELL E.; mother, Mrs. 
Ethel Chandler, Hartford. 

CHASE, Sgt. LESTER M.; 
G. Chase, South Kent. 

CIARLO, Pic. THOMAS J.; wife, Mrs, Florence 
L. Clarlo, Waterbury 

DILLON, Pvt. WALTER V.; 


Dillon, New Haven 
DOBER, Sgt. HYMAN G.; father, Joseph Do- 
Michael 


ber, Bridgeport. 
WALTER; 
William 


wife, 


wife, Mrs. Caroline 
father, John M. 


DOOHAN, 8/Sset father, 
J. Doohan, New Haven 
DONALD A.; 
Dubay, Waterbury 
FRULLA. S/Sgt. EUGENE J.; 
Frulla, Ridgefield 
FULLER, Pvt. CLIFFORD L.; 
Ruby L. Robinson, Middletown. 
RICHARD £E.; 
Margaret Gleason, Bridgeport 
GULYAS, Pvt. PAUL P.; father, Pal L. Gul- 
yas, Norwalk. 
HELSTROM, S/Sgt. BERNARD C.; father, Al- 
bert O. Helstrom, Fairchild 
HOOKS, Pfc. CHARLES A.; 
M. Hooks, Bridgeport 
HRENYO, Pic. GEORGE; mother, 
Hrenyo Bridgeport 
JACOBS Set RAYMOND; 
Jacobs. West Hartford 
JARNO’ Pt WALTER R mother, 
Katherine B. Jarnot, New Britain 
JAWORSKI, Pic. JOSEPH A.: mother, 
Mary Jaworski, Hartford 
KADER. Pvt. JAMES J Mrs. 
beth Kader, Bridgeport 
LINTHICUM, Pvt LESTER L.; Mrs. 
Inez G. Linthicum, Putnam. 
McNAMARA, Pvt. JOHN A.; mother, Mrs 
Helen E. McNamara, New Haven 
ODELL, Pvt. LOUIS H.; mother, Mrs. Theresa 
Odell, New Haven 
PELLETIER, S/Sgt. RODOLPHE T-.; 
Mrs. Leontin Pelletier, Danielson. 
PENHOLLOW, S/Sgt. FRANK; sister, 
Emma Sieberg, Northfield. 
PERREAULT, Pfc. ROY J.; 
Mary Perreault, Bristol. 
ERSCHY, Sgt. LOUIS J.; 
Perschy, Plainville 
PETITTI, Pfc. MICHAEL; Mary 
Petitt!, Bridgeport. 
RASSIGA, list Lt. FRANCIS J.: Ste- 
phen F. Rassiga, Canaan 
RODETIS, Pvt ETER; wife, Mrs. Stella P 
Rodetis, Stratford 
Miss 
Mrs 


father, 
Peter 
Mrs. 
Mrs. 


father, 
mother, 


mother, 


wife, Mrs. Marion 
Mrs. Mary 
Samuel 
Mrs 


Mrs 


father, 


mother, Eliza- 


wife, 


mother, 
Mrs 
Mrs 


Helen 


mother, 
Mrs 
Mrs 


wife, 
mother, 


father, 


ROYOKO, Pfc. JOSEPH; 
Royoko, Bridgeport 
SALAK, Pvt. NESTOR V.; mother, 
Salak. New Britain 
SANDELL, Maj BERTIL B.; 
Alvida A. Sandell, Groton 
SANTONE, Pvt. MICHAEL J.: 
Rose Santone, Stratford 
Pfc. RAYMOND L.; 
Bridgeport 

Corp AROLD J: 
New Haven 

Pfc. LUCIEN A 
Esther Tetrault, Waterbury 
WALKER. Pfc. FRANK J 
G. Peterson, Ridgefield 
Corp. WILLIAM: father 


Pfc. FRANK R.: 
Zyamont, Greenwich 
PHILIP E.. Jr.; 
West Hartford 
Pvt. JOSEPH M 
Sue Discepolo, Bridgeport 
SOUCHER, Pfc. ARTHUR D.; 
E. Boucher, Bridgeport 
BRANCATO, Pvt. SEBASTIAN 
Mrs. Sebastiana Clanci, Hartford 
BRISTOL, Pvt? ERWIN F sister, 
Mirabella, New Haven 
BROWN Pvt BERNARD 
Brown, New Haven 
BROWN, Pfc. MAURICE V.: 
Brown, New Haven 
ARR, Pfc. JOHN L 
L. Carr, West Haven 
DAVIS. Pvt. GEORGE C.; mother, Mrs. Evelyn 
Budrow, Bridgeport 
DAVIS, Pvt. JOHN J.: 
Davis, New London 
ITACCARINO, Pvt. RALPH J.; 
Iacearino, New Haven 
KARP, Pvt. SELIG A 
Karp, Stamford 
KARPUC, Pfc. ALBIN B 
Karpuc Norwich 
Pvt. STANLEY 
Kustra, New Britain 
MANGINI TSG DANIEL 
Rose Mangini, Waterbury 
MATTERN, Pfc. ERNEST E.; 
nor Mattern, New London 
MAURO. Pfc. JOSEPH F 
Mauro, New Haven 
McCARTHY, Pfc. WILLIAM R 
Mary McCarthy. Hartford 
MOLLICA, Pvt. JOSEPH; mother 
Mollica, Bridgeport 
NUZZO, Pic. MATTHEW J.; mother, Mrs. Anna 
Nuzzo, New Haven 
OKSYS, Sgt. ALEX C 
Tariffville 
PATRICK, Pvt. FRANCIS B 
ronica Patrick, Somersavile 
PEPE, Pvt. WILLIAM G father, 
F.; 


New Haven 
PETROSINO, Pie. RALPH 
L. Petrosinoe, Bridgeport 
SCHAPPA, S/Set. ROBERT E 
Nellie Schappa, Wethersfield 
SUDARSKY 24 «(Lt JOSEPH 
Charlies Sudarsky, Hartford 
Pfc. JAMES F.; mother 
Plantsville 

Asiatic Area 

SMOLENSKI, Pvt. FRANK J.: 
Mary Smolenski, Hartford 

Central Pacific 
24 Lt. WILLIAM T 
New Haven 

Pvt. ROBERT A 
Bettini. Torrington 
DEBROOKE, ist Lt. WILLIAM 
John E. Debrocke. Milford 
DEGOSTIN, Pfc. JOHN J 
Degostin, Hartford 


sister. Mary 
Anna 
mother, Mrs 
mother, Mrs 
Mrs 


Mrs 


wife Alice 
Smith, 

SNOW, 
Snow, 


wife, Anna 
Mrs 


Mary 


wife, 


sister. Mrs 

John Wasco, 

Stamiord 

sister, Miss 
Marian 

ALLEN, Pvt 
Edith Allen 

BONFIGLIO 


H 


mother Mrs 


sister, Mrs 


wife, Mrs. Marie 


P mother 


Mrs. Vera 


father Edward 


father, Guy H 


Cc. Jr.; mother, Mrs. John 


mother Mrs. Anna 


father, Charles 


wife, Mrs. Pauline L 


father, Alexandrin 


L.: wife, Mrs. Nellie 


Cc mother, Mrs 


wife, Mra. Elea 


wife, Mrs. Shirley 


mother, Mrs 


Mrs. Anna 


fother, John A. Oksys 


wife, Mra. Ve- 


Philip Pepe 


father, Frank 


mother, Mrs 


S.: father, 


Mrs. Nellie 


Thayer, 
mother. Mrs 


Area 


father, John P 


BEGINA 
Begina 


BETTINI Erminio 


father 


P father 


father!) Pasquale 


mother, Mrs. Vir- 


ginia Domenick, Hartford 
MARTINELLI, Pfc. DOMINICK J 
Mrs. Catherine Martinelli. Waterbury 
McENROE,. Corp. RICHARD J sister, 
Mary EF. Winters. West Hartford 
ROBERT J.: wife, 
P Murray, New Britain 
YOUNG, 24 Lt. BERNARD J: 
Frank H. Young, West Haven. 


mother 
Mrs. 
Mrs. Anita 


mother, Mrs 


Mrs 
Eliza- 
Mar- 


Jersey City | 


1.Miller 


suggests 


Gloves 


to accompany the 
tailored wardrobe 


Meyers Make 
4-button pigskin, 
hand-detailed, 


in natural, cork, 


taf 


black, brown, 


6.50 e 


white. 


Meyers Make 


Hn Hip. 


Prins ~ 


4 


Shortie, whipstitched, 
capeskin or 
doeskin-finish 
lambskin, 


black or brown. 


3.50 


Meyers Make 
Shortie pigskin, 
whipstitehed, in 
cork, 


natural, brown, 


black. white. 


5.00 br 


Meyers Make 
Washable 
doeskin, classic 
slipon in black, 


brown, white. 


689 Fifth Avenue 
1552 Broadway 

450 Fifth Avenue 
49 West 34 Street 


LOVELY GIFTS ARE REMEMBRANG®S OF a) 
“a 





| mum, many of those now being 
}convicted will be set free.”” M. Bé- 
nard does not indicate whether his 
prediction applies also to those 
sentenced to death, but it has been 
jadmitted at the Ministry of Justice 


OPINION ON PURGE 
VARIED IN FRANCE 


Heavy and Light Sentences | when French men and women were 
Win Equal Favor—Lack of \denounced to the Germans. 


The provincia! courts are 
Treason Gauge Cited jactive. In St. Quentin, Lille, Auril- 


lac and Pau, death sentences have 


| that the right of pardon is being} 


also} 


By G. H. ARCHAMBAULT 
By Wireless to THz New Yorx Times, 

RARIS, Oct. 31—After having 
clamored for a purge of collabora- 
tionists, public opinion, now that 
it is in full operation, seems rather 
disconcerted, to judge by the press. 

Apparently it is nonplussed by 
the fact that there is no yard- 
stick by which to measure collab- 
oration, not to speak of treason. 


been imposed on collaborationists 


who handed over their compatriots 


|to the Germans. 

| Gen. Henri-Fernand Dentz 
|was arrested in Grenoble when the 
icity was liberated, has been 


| brought to Paris for trial. He is 


jnotorious for having signed two 
|capitulations-the first when Paris 


|was delivered to the Germans and| 
ithe second when he surrendered) 


|\Syria to the Allies 


FRENCH LOOK TO U. S. 


who 


The organs of the resistance move-| 
ment pointed out today that the) 
spectators in the Paris Court of| 
Justice had applauded last week} 
when Georges Suarez, editor 
chief of Aujourd’hui, was sentenced) States for meat, milk and cereals 
to death for intelligence with the) and both land and ocean transport 
enemy, and that they had applaud-/to help relieve the food shortage 


ed again this week os “ye gre in France and North Africa, Sup- 
; i > he 
Lauzanne, editor in chief o the | ply Minister’ Paul Giaccobi said 


FOR HELP ON SUPPLY 


PARIS, Oct. 31 ()—The French | 
in| people are counting on the United} 


Matin, tried on the same charge, 
was sentenced to solitary confine- 
ment for twenty years. 

It was assumed that in Lau-| 
zanne’s case the court had been 
influenced by his age—70—and the| 
fact that he had not received more 
than 14,000 francs a month for his 
editorial contributions. Yet today} 
the same court sentenced to death 
a man of 75, Count Armand-Louis-| 
Marie de Chastenay de Puységur, | 
an impecunious aristocrat. 

He admitted that his political 
philosophy consisted in being an 
“anti” — anti-capitalist, anti-Se- 
mitic, anti-Free Mason, anti-Repub- 
lican and anti-Democratic. Yet he 
married a Jewess “who brought 
me 10 francs as a dowry, and I 
still adore her.” 

The count was accused of having 
mailed to people on his - -lling list 
mimeographed “news letters’ fa-| 
voring Nazism and “the new Eu-} 
rope,” and having also occasion-} 


ally broadcast on the same sub-| 


today. 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, 


PARIS REGIME WINS 


IN CRISIS ON MILITIA 


Orders Communist-Dominated 
Groups Dissolved and 
Disarmed at Once 


By HAROLD CALLENDER 

By Wireless to Tut New York Times 
PARIS, Oct. 31—The Govern- 
|ment has ordered the complete dis- 
jarmament of the so-called Patri- 
lotic Guard, it was 
jafter a Cabinet meeting tonight. 

Asked whether this meant the 
| dissolution of that militia, the Min- 
jister of Information said that it 
did. 
|Council of Resistance had been 
jconsulted before this action was| 
|taken, he said that a committee of | 
ithe ~ suncil had discussed the sub- | 
ject with Gen. Charles de Gaulle. 

The Minister said that the Gov-| 
jernment was confident that the} 
|militia would voluntarily surren-} 
|der its arms and that the police} 
force available would be adequate} 
for safeguarding order. The Gov- 
jernment said that it had taken 





NOVEMBER 





1, 1944. L+ 13 


| 
is also a defeat for the Council, | open clash with General de| that its authority will be respected.|that means that the cewntry is|be less ready to follow the courses 


which had followed the Commu- 
nist line on this and other ques- 


tions. 


l exclusive authority by the 

jernment on a major issue touching 
those groups that had 
emerged from the resistance forces 
{and sought to retain control in cer- 
itain regions, notably in the center 


Gov- 


armed 


It was the first firm assertion of 


iGaulle’s authority. 
Strengthened by Recognition 
The took these 
measures reports of 
high-handed acts by militiamen in 
the past few days 
to liquidate the armed bands be- 
fore the meeting of the Provisional 


Government 


because of 


It also desired 


| Some of the best informed politi-|profoundly democratic and “ad-|urged by the Communists. 

cal circles predicted that, as a|vanced” in its political ideas, but| The Communists still took a true- 
result of the controversy, the first;}usually profoundly averse to vio-| ulent line. Their secretary, Jacques 
elections in France would mark a|lent changes or revolutionary|Duclos, quoted in l'Humanité today, 
|swing against not only the Com-| methods. |said: “There is a disposition to con- 
munists but the Council, | sider those who have fought the 


which has seemed to line up with} ,. ww they were h Pl prwonseces | of the country more or less 
the Communists on the issue of) +), noha dadithed th yon of| suspect, while traitors, profiteers 
| P , e 0 “Is , > +s 
|the maintenance of order. It was!.. mmu-)/and cowards are in key positions 
nists have opposed the municipal] in the National Administration.” M 


even Communists Oppose Elections 





Consultative Assembly on Nov. 7| recalled that, after the insurrec- 


announced | 


Asked whether the National | 


At present, he said, a large part | these measures: 
of the population two months after} 1. The police are to enforce the 
liberation is receiving little more} laws against the carriage or trans- 
than half the required 2,000 calo-| 
ries daily. 

“We have some difficult months] 
to get through,” he said. 
cannot properly speak of a ‘ration 
problem’—there are hundreds of | carrying them 
completely different problems that!3 Those possessing ‘‘arms of war” 
call for different solutions accord-| who do not belong to the Army or 
ing to regions, density of popula-| the police must 
tion and whether they are rural or} arms to the police nearest their 
urban areas. homes Receipts will be given 

“Americans can help our prob-| and the arms will be turned over 
lem greatly and have done so al-| to the Army. 
ready to a great extent in the/4. Those desiring to volunteer for 
southern zone. The principal prod-| “the defense of Republican lib- 
ucts we want to import from the| erties’ are invited to enlist at 
United States are canned milk,| town halls or police stations, If 
canned meat. lard and flour or| ‘he authorities call on them, pri- 
wheat.” ority will be given to former mem- 


The United States, he continued, | , ee ee ee ee ans 
can help France “by giving us|* a BP & 
~rre . be opened in each military region 
transport facilities—we lack, on| pened . & 


longing to the Army or the reg- 
ular police. 


| police are to seize the arms and 
| and arrest and prosecute those 


and here, too, priority will be 


“One|2: If the laws are not obeyed, the| 


jects. For this, it was charged, he| one hand, vehicles, fuels and espe-| 


~ given to volunteers from 
received 20,000 francs a month,| cially tires and, on the other hand,| 


Patriotic Guard. 


the | 


and the spring municipal elections.|tion by the Paris Commune in 
\since the liberation. The issue had its hand was strengthened to this roti the first regular election had 
mere! end by the Allies’ recognition. The|Swung to the extreme right and 

been so clear and important| ajlies have a military interest in| France had received a Constitution 
that it seemed to most observers|the maintenance -of order injinspired by monarchical principles. 
that the Government could not/France, through which their sup-|General de Gaulle has compared 
compromise without diminishing) ply lines pass. |his own provisional regime to the 
its authority over the country,| There were some misgivings to-j|one that struggled against the 
which is not yet entirely under its| night about the Government's offer| Commune after the defeat of 1870. 
control physically. jto use the militiamen as police} France has changed little in her 
The question now is what the|later on against those who might|aversion to disorder and extrem- 
armed bands and the Communists|not have surrendered their arms.|ism.. “We want to go left, but not 
will do, having lost in the first| But the Government is confident’ farther,” is an old saying in France 


lof France, where they have ruled 


s0 


FIFTH AVENUE AT 34TH STREET 


port of arms by persons not be-| 


| 


surrender their) 


“two-thirds of which,” he explained| ships to mobilize our colonial re- 


airily, “went away in overhead ex- 
penses.” 

After the sentence 
passed the Count remarked: “I 
am French and independent, and 


shail die so. I am a victim of Ger-| 


man hypocrisy.” 

Commenting on these various 
trials in the Défense de la France 
Pierre Bénard predicted that “most 
probably the return of peace will 
be accompanied by amnesties, so 
that, within two years at the maxi- 


B. ALTMAN « CO. 


had been| 


sources.” 


Somoza Invites Exiles Home 
By Cable to THe New Yor TIMt 
MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Oct. 31 
President Anastasio Somoza an- 
jnounced today that “the doors of 
Nicaragua are to all politi- 
cians outside the country who wish 
to return and live in and 
order.’ He said he would arrange 
for free suffrage at the next elec- 
tions, “satisfactory to.all parties.” 


E 


open 


pea e 


Victory for Government 
| The announcement came at the 


end of a day full of discussion of} 


ithe crisis of authority precipitated 
by the apparent conflict between 
the Council and the Government 


on the question of restoring order | 


in France. 
tion is a sharp defeat for the Com- 
munists, who had made 
campaign in favor of the retention 
of the militia, which they had per- 
meated and seemed to control. 


SHOPS FOR MEN 


IT’S EASY TO BE WELL-DRESSED IN A 


aller 


single-breasted 


BO-°° 


double-breasted 


B5-°* 


a 
; 


i 


rn 


G 


AP LS ta 
Mn 


ma. 


SIO 
Py 
ews 


SS 


SS 
ms 


Be . 


ry > 
<SSESS8 


s$ 


>> >> 
>>> 


al 
MALLS 


SS 
>> 
hk 


ee 


SSS 
If, 


PP 


SS 


my 
- 
4 


otéw OVERCOAT 


¥7 * 
, 
f 
f 


we believe that owning one of these fine overcoats will 


be a long-time pleasure to you. They’re as fine as can 


he produced, ready to wear... and they look it, 


inside and out! Comfortable, urbane, thoroughly excel- 


lent. 


blues or browns. 


And you may select from good-looking greys, 


shops for men, sixth floor 


also at our East Orange shop 


The Government's ac-| 


a heated | 


It 


elections on the ground that the| Duclos went even so far as to sug- 
prisoners will not have returned.| pest that General de Gaulle’s secret 
The Communists have half per-|service—called the Direction Gén- 
suaded the Council of Resistance to| érale des Services de Sécurité—“is 
put up a single ticket for all par-|capable of organizing provocative 
ties so that there will be no real| acts and the ransom of peasants to 
expression of political opinion. accuse the patriotic organizations 

The Council has wavered on this! of doing so.” The National Council 
point. But, after its clash with|of Resistance has not made th 
General de Gaulle over the Patriot-| charge, but it did vote to send a 
ic Guard—which placed the Coun-| delegation to General de Gaulle to 
cil in the embarrassing position of| ask him to abolish this secret serv- 
opposing a measure for order—it| ice. Here again it acted in line with 
is expected that the Council may the Communists’ demands. 


| MAKE UP YOUR LIST GEOGRAPHICALLY—AND YOULL FIND 


THIS YEAR IT’S TRUE we are asked to shop, ship and mail Christmas gifts earlier than ever te Insere 


delivery in time for Christmas, 


Altman’s thinks this can be accomplished without losing one bit of the gaiety 


and excitement that make Christmas shopping an adventure, 


ALTMAN’S SUGGESTS YOU MAKE UP your shopping list by geographical zones. For instance, Uncte 


Willie in Seattle lives farthest away, se order his bedroom slippers and ship them off first thing. 


Next, Cousin 


Jane in Dallas—you want to decide between a bedjacket and earrings for her: whichever yor choose, send tt 


right off and go on to the Smiths in Chicage—a food giit basket for them and toys for the little Smitha, 


BEFORE YOU CAN SAY “November 30th ts the iast day for mailing the packages to be delivered by Chriet- 


mas” your shopping is done, and you haven't had to give one apprehensive look at the ealendar. 


Best of ali, 


you'll find you've enjoyed doing your Christmas shopping at Altman’s as much as your family and friends will 


be delighted with your giit-selections. 





- 


MORE BOMBS 


BATTERED COLOGNE Regime Amid Rubble Under Allies REVEALED ATBREDA| IS 


‘Ruined City, With 3,000 of Its 156,000 


RAF ‘Heavies’ and Mosquitos 
Bring Weight of Blows in 
4 Days to 10,000 Tons 


LONDON, Wednesday, Nov. 1 
(UP)—Heavy and light bombers of 
the Royal Air Force struck two 
more blows last night in the Allies’ 
obliteration offensive against the 
German rail ind industrial center 
of Cologne, which the British have 
bombed eight times since Satur- 
day. 

The attacks rounded out a month 
in which Britain-based planes 
bombed Germany with more than 
100,000 tons of missiles, 


tions in a year. 
The British Air Ministry report- 
ed that “well over” 10,080 short 


despite | 
“ some of the worst weather condi-| 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 





ROCK Aachen’s New Mayor Setting Up |BOMBER ACCURACY |ANTWERP BATTLE 


Former Residents, Picks Up Threads 
of Life Under Great Handicaps 


| 


By CLIFTON DANIEL 


By Wireless to Tuz New Yorx Tres. 


| AACHEN, Oct. 31—The new Anti- 
|Nazi Buergermeister of Aachen, 


chosen by the Allied Military Gov- 
ernment, went to work today, ten 
jdays after the forma! surrender of 
the city to the American First 
Army. Under military escort he 
ltoured the Aachen area in a cap- 
itured German automobile, search- 
jing for reliable Germans to serve 
jas sub-officials of his puppet gov- 
|ernment. 

The new buergermeister is May- 
or, not of a large city any longer, 
\but of a wilderness of rubble. As 
he made his rounds this morning, 
iscarcely a thing stirred in the ruins 


of Aachen’s homes except tattered 


jtors, nurses, carpenters, bricklay- 
ers, public-service experts and 
others who can assist in re-estab- 
lishing normal life. 

The Buergermeister’s task, un-}| 
der the orders of the Military Gov- 
ernment, is not so much to govern 
the existing city as it is to create 
a new city from the ruins of the} 
old. 
| Scarcely a house in Aachen is 


jundamaged. Every bank has been! 


Bulldozers Work Overtime in 
Netherland City to Undo the 
Damage of Allied Fliers 


By JAMES MacDONALD 

By Wireless to Tur New York Times 
WITH BRITISH SECOND ARMY 
FORCES on Outskirts of Breda, 
Oct. 30 (Delayed)—This is an un- 
healthy spot for everybody—Ger- 
man forces, Allied fighters and 
Netherland civilians alike. There 


are enemy snipers hidden in a 
wood of stunted fir trees, lining 
the main highways approaching 
the city, the last of three imme- 
diate goals that the British forces 


WON BY ALLIES 


Continued From Page 1 


|Retranchement and smashed as 
crust of the enemy resistance. 
According to one Royal Air 
Force pilot who flew across Wal- 
cheren recently, about three-quar- | 
liters of the island is under water); 
'as a result of RAF bombings of the | 
|seawalis, and the only positions left 
inviolate by sea are coastal ditenaal 
batteries around Flushing and anti- 
aircraft Positions near them. The 
jdocks of Flushing, the main road 
jacross the island and the central 
|canal are barely discernible. 
| Neither of the two German posi- 
| ions north and south of the Schelde 
jappears to be especially strong. It 
lis doubtful whether either can hold 





[flattened The postoffice is ruined.|set out to capture last week, the|©Ut under another forty-eight hours 


The railway station is useless. The | 
power plant is usable, but the pow-| 
er lines are completely unservice- | 
able. The same 
telephone exchange. All impor'tant | 
officials of the city fled with the 


is true of the | 


first two being 's Hertogenbosch 
and Tilburg. 

There are enemy land mines all 
around, and big bomb craters are 


everywhere that only a saucy little 


jof heavy assault. 

| While Allied divisions move 
jnorthward to the Meuse and west- 
|ward to the North Sea, the German 
attempt to slow down these opera- 


Samad Prisoners Taken 


By AEF Total 637,544 


By Wireless to Tat New York Times. 
SUPREME HEADQUARTERS, 
Allied Expeditionary Force, Oct. 
31—The armies of the Allied 
Expeditionary Force have taken 
637,544 prisoners since D-day, 
June 6, it was announced today. 

The American First Army has 
the honor of having captured 
the largest number of Germans, 
199,413, up to midnight on Oct. 
28 and is now nearing the 200,- 
000 mark despite comparative 
quie on its front. 

Here are the figures for the 
army groups and armies: 
Twelfth Army Group. .. .292,363 
American First Army.. .199,413 
American Third Army... 92,950 
Sixth Army Group... .. .108,855 
American Seventh Army. 50,916 
French First Army...... 
Twenty-first Army Grp..186,326 
British Second Army.... 83,582 
Canadian First Army.... .82,744 
if EF errr ret 
American Ninth Army... 50,000 





Capelle, on the road running par- 
allel with the Meuse a thousand 


57,939 | 


St eS SSS 
been cleared of the enemy. More | ville there is active patrolling by 
than 2,500 of the Germans who| Americans and heavy shelling by 
composed the original garrison|the enemy. 

|have been taken prisoner. Another| Bru and Raon |'Etape, east 
{3,000 are believed to have escaped|Rambervillers, nave veen captured, 
to Walcheren over the causeway,|and another force has taken Jean- 
while the remainder who were not/menil in the Bruyere sector 

}killed or wounded have been evacu-| 

|ated to the north by sea. 


| Defense of Walcheren Doomed 


| The defense of Walcheren Island, 
ldifficult enough with most of it 
junder water, has been complicated 
by the inundation of Arnemuiden 
jim the east of the island. This 
jtown, once the center of the de- 
|fense, has been completely flooded. 
With the crossing of the advance 
{to Sluis and the taking of Re- 
|tranchement the position of two or 
three thousand Germans in the 
pocket south of the Schelde is un-| 
tenable. The enemy is clinging to! 
|Knokke and Heyst in the northern 
|part of the pocket, but elsewhere 


PEACETIME 
QUALITY TODAY 


jlittle opposition is expected. 

| The battle front is relatively 
quiet elsewhere. The Third Army 
has finally cleared Mezieres les 
|Metz, northeast of Metz, of the 
lenemy. The First Army front has 
|been so calm that only fourteen 
|prisoners were taken in the last 
‘twenty-four hours. 

| There have been some minor ad- 





At leading department 


jeep or a big lumbering tank can/|tions by attacking from Germany 


tons of explosive and incendiary | 
bombs had been loosed on Cologne | 


window curtains whipped by the 
winter wind. “It is just as if there 


Wehrmacht. negotiate. 


in the four days 


iwasn’t any city of Aachen,” re- 
In the latest wasn't an} ity 


attacks Mosquito . - 
q |marked an American officer. 


planes hit the Rhineland city at aii on 2 _ 
7:15 o'clock. Two hours later} There were once 156,000 persons 


about 500 British heavy bombers | Nore. Rng: Bios 0 raph ng lle 
dumped a great load of bombs onto SS troops drove out at least three- 
the Rhineland target, less than fourths of those. By today upward 
First Army front, striking despite pel age mele a nan a oc 
heavy cloud cover. Over Monday their owe army and bombed almost 
night Mosquitos and heavy bomb- every night They are finding bed 
ers had dropped 4,000 tons of). shelter in cellars, on the lower 
bombs on Cologne. floors of partly wrecked houses 

Oil Plant Bombed by Day and in the dank and massive bunk- 


By daylight yesterday other 
British heavy bombers attacked a 
synthetic oil plant at Bottrop in| 
the Ruhr, twenty miles north of| 
Cologne. | 

A blind bombing attack by Lib- 
erators of the United States 
Eighth Air Force last Thursday on 
the Mittelland Canal, a principal 
transport artery between Berlin 
and the Ruhr, was revealed yester- 


day in reconnaissance pictures to} 


have blasted an eighty-five-foot 


breach in one bank, setting loose a} 


lers built around the city for de- 
|fense and air-raid protection. 


Residents Trickle Back 


| Walking against the stream of 
|military traffic racing down a wide 
|street lined on both sides by dis- 
lorderly piles of debris, three old 
i'women climbed a hill toward one 
of these half-homes of Aachen to- 
day. 
barrow holding a single cardboard 
suitcase. The others carried noth- 
ling. They chattered among them- 
selves, disregarding the passing 


A Minimum of Government 


The official policy, however, is 
thet there shall be a minimum of 
Government and its prime objective 
will be to insure order, safety and 
sanitation in the rear of the Amer- 
ican lines. Most of what is done 
for the civilians of Aachen they 
must do for themselves with a bare 
minimum of assistance from the 
American authorities. 

The Buergermeister will have 
the same authority as in peace- 
time, but all his actions will be 
subject to veto by the military 
government. His government will 
probably include a council, a treas- 





Allied aerial bombing attacks 
have been so deadly accurate that 
bulldozers have to work overtime 


to fill in the gaps and make roads} 


passable. Jagged stumps of trees, 
grotesquely misshapen bodies of 
dead German soldiers, stiffened 
carcasses of fat cows that once 
grazed in the fields bordering the 
main highways—all testfily to the 
accuracy of Allied air power. 
Breda’s airport, which the Ger- 
mans formerly used as an air base, 
is in such a bad condition that it 


at Meijel, seventeen miles south- 
least of Eindhoven, on the right 
lflank, is moving toward an in- 
iglorious end. 

British forces moved in to rein- 
\force the American units that sus- 
|tained the first shock of the Ger- 
man attack have fought their way 
into the northern tip of Liesel, one 
of the two towns captured by the 
jenemy in his offensive. According 
to one report from the front, which 
jis not verified here, the British 
|have retaken all of Liesel after 
|bitter street fighting. North of 
the town other British troops have 


would make any real estate agent! 


yards to the north, and vances on the Seventh Army front 
smashed on to reach the river. lfarther south. Southeast of Lune- 

A second column dashed along 
the misty, rain-lashed roads to| _ 
capture Ramsdonk and move to 
within a thousand yards of Geer-| 
truidenberg Bridge, which is now 
denied to the enemy by artillery 
fire. 

This is one of the two main road| 
bridges across the Meuse in this 
sector. With it under fire enemy 
traffic must be diverted to the 
Moerdijk Bridge to the west, which 
is already threatened. 

British, Americans and Poles 
have fought their way northward 
to the Mark River, last German 


then | 


stores and men’s shops 


weep. It used to be an airman’s 
paradise—a flat, open, grassy field 
offering a take-off in any direc- 


urer, a city clerk, a police chief, etc. tion. Thanks to Allied bombing at- 


One pushed a light wheel-| 





tremendous flood and draining the 
waterway for more than three} 
miles near Minden. At least thirty 


Americans, their conquerors. 

An old gnome of a man, with a 
patch over one inflamed eye, scur- 
loaded barges and tugboats were/ried into one of the towering steel 
left stranded. |and concrete bunkers, big as an 

The attack, officially described| apartment house, where he once 
as one of the greatest American|jiyeq for fourteen days. He was 
precision bombing operations, ef-|searching for a bicycle and other 
fectively slashed a route extensive-| property he had left there when 
ly used by the Germans in the!he was evacuated. 
movement of military material. At! In front of the Military Govern- 
its western terminus the Mittelland| ment headquarters, where Lieut. 
joins the big Dortmund-Ems Canal,|/coj], A. A. Carmichael of Mont- 


Twenty-five potential policemen 
already have been recruited and 
are being investigated. They are 
mainly middle-aged and older and 
in most instances have served as 
policemen before. Wearing special 
arm bands, they should be patrol- 
ling Aachen within forty-eight 
hours. 

Most policemen are reluctant to 
serve under the Allied authorities 
for fear of reprisals against rela- 
tives elsewhere in Germany, but if 
necessary they will be ordered to 
work. Whether they will be armed 
is an unsettled question, but in the 
beginning, at least, they probably 
will not be. 

One of Aachen’s hospitals has 
been set aside for civilians and it 
is being repaired by German labor- 








which the Royal Air Force 
breached in an attack o Sept. 23 

Traffic on the waterway was be- 
lieved halted for a minimum of 
several weeks, and* possibly for 
three or four months. Bombing by 
instrument from a height of more 
than four miles, the Liberator 
cre\ . registered hits by the dozen 
along the canal. The unleashed flood 
damaged a 
necting with the Weser River and 
swept into several near-by factory 
buildings. 


0. S. Record Bombing in October | 


The Eighth Air Force reported 
that its bombers had dropped more 
than 43,600 tons of bombs on Ger- 
man soil during October in the 
heaviest month of American bomb- 
ing in history. It was believed that 
the British bomb tonnage dropped 
on Germany in ‘ie month would 
equal or exceed the 64,400 tons the 
RAF dropped during July. 

The Eighth Air Force’s heavy 
bombers carried out eighteen at- 
tacks in October, despite adverse 
weather. The Eighth also estab- 
lished a record in the low per- 
centage of planes lost. Out of 18,- 
000 heavy bomber sorties in Octo- 
ber, 122 planes, or less than .7 per 
cent, were lost; out of 13,150 fight- 
sorties, sixty-seven planes, or 
.5 per cent, failed to re- 


er 
less than 
turn. 

Best previous month's tonnage 
dropped on Germany by the 
Eighth Air Force was 35,140 in 
September. 

Some 9,263 tons of American 
bombs fell on Cologne during Oc- 
tober, Duisburg suffered the worst 
single hammering of any city 
when the RAF loosed more than 
10,000 tons of bombs on it Oct. 
14. The most sustained attacks of 
the month were against Cologne, 
and there was every indication 
that the city would be “hamburg- 
ized” long before American troops 
get there. 


Tremor Felt in Montreal 
MONTREAL, Oct. 31 (4)—Resi- 
dents in the northern and western 
sections of this city felt for “ten 


subsidiary canal con- 


gomery, Ala., has his office, twen- 


‘|ty-five or thirty oddly assorted 


civilians waited in line to register 
on their return to the city. They 
smiled as an insolent dachshund 
puppy yapped at the heels of pass- 
ing American military boots. 

No one is allowed to return to 
|Aachen until thoroughly investi- 
|gated and priority is given to doc- 





| Spanish Republicans Fight 
FFI in Southern France 


Sy The Assoctated Press 
PARIS, Oct. 31—Approximate- 
ly 2,000 Spanish republicans and 
Russians, banded together under 
the insignia of a black skullcap 
with a white death's head, have 
established a stronghold in the 
mountains in France’s southern 
Dordogne Department and are 
waging a private war against 
the French Forces of the Inte- 
rior, an observer just returned 
from thee region said today. 
The band, he declared, is com- 
posed of fugitives from Spain, 
including veterans of the Inter- 
| national Brigade of the Spanish 
| civil war, and fugitives from Ger- 
| man concentration camps _ in 
| France. Their objective is to 
| muster forces for an opportunity 
| to strike across the border at the 
| Spanish regime. 
| Normally, like other anti-Ma- 
| drid campaigners, they would 
have been aligned with the FFI 
in a common fight against the 
Germans. But this group has 
come into conflict with the FFI 
because its members have been 
| raiding surrounding farms and 
stores, occasionally shooting peo- 
ple who resisted. 
Their stronghold is so secure 
that no effective measures have 
been taken against them. 








| Polish Children in New Zealand 
By Cable to THe New YorxK TIMES. 

| WELLINGTON, New Zealand, 
|Oct. 31—More than 600 Polish chil- 


ers and will be staffed by German 
doctors and nurses. The newest 
part of the city’s first-class prison 
escaped severe damage and can be 
used. 

The police, city officials and 
other public servants probably will 
have to work on credit, as the 
financial structure of Aachen is 
literally destroyed. The possibility 
of a credit system for the whole 
population is envisaged. 


two Elected Lafayette Trustees 
Special to Tue New York Times. 
EASTON, Pa., Oct. 31—Col. 
Ernest G. Smith, Wilkes-Barre 
newspaper publisher, and Charles 
T. Siebert Jr. of Pittsburgh, an of- 
ficial of the Carnegie-Illinois Steel 
Corporation, have been elected life- 
trustees of Lafayette College. 


tacks, it now looks like a dump 
heap. Everywhere there are bomb 
craters big enough to bury a dou- 
ble-decked bus. Its crumpled han- 
gar looks like a dead elephant 
underlying a blanket of green cam- 
ouflage. 

The main highway leading to 
Breda is pitted with bomb holes. 
Some Allied airmen seem to have 


| fought their way into the woods to 
| win tactically important positions. 

Although fighting continued all 
day the position is definitely im- 
proved. The Germans are still ag- 
gressive, but their attacks lack the 
| weight of those of Sunday and 
| Monday. 

The British troops that rein- 
forced the Americans are part of 
the British Second Army and the 
jentire force is under General 
|Dempsey’s command. 

The Germans failed here in their 





defensive position south of the 
Meuse, in several places and forced 


two crosssings in the face of stiff 





The first of 


German opposition. 
these crossings was made south of 
the Moerdijk Bridge, and despite 
counter-attacks by enemy infantry, 
backed by self-propelled guns, it 
appears to be secure, with advance 
British patrols about four miles 
from the Moerdijk Bridge. 

Another bridgehead across the 
Mark is three-quarters of a mile 


made sure of their bemb-aiming/ primary objective, that of slowing 
by strewing their explosives in|down the Allied movements to the 
crisscross fashion, not only hitting|west, but it is evident that the 
roads but also tearing up thejland belt separating the Allies from 
sides of highways and scattering|the Ruhr has been widened by the 


bombs in adjoining fields and 
thereby providing applauding 
Dutch farmers with freshly killed 
meat of their prized cattle. 


MEXICAN ENVOY DISMISSED 


Romero Out of Post in Cuba, 
Official Statement Says 


MEXICO CITY, Oct. 31 (*)—4J. 
Ruben Romero, Mexican Ambassa- 
dor to Cuba, “has ceased” to be 
Ambassador, effective today, ac- 
cording to an official announce- 
ment last night. 

The curt Foreign Office note 
said: 

“The Secretary of Foreign Af- 
fairs announces that by the deci- 
sion of the President of the Re- 
public the commission of J. Ruben 
Romero as Ambassador of our 
country to the government of the 
Republic of Cuba nas ceased.” 

Officials would give no explana- 
tion, but there was no suggestion 
that Sefior Romero had resigned. 
Newspapers, however, intimated 
that he intended to go into politics. 


Tailored at 


|Germans during the last five days. 
| This may or may not have been a 
|secondary German objective. At 
lany rate it has been accomplished. 

The Allied advance toward the 
|Meuse was accomplished in the 
iface of spotty opposition, with 
small enemy forces holding ad- 
vantageous positions until they 
were crushed by a wave of onrush- 
ing Allied troops. The German 
pocket north of s’ Hertogenbosch 
is now contained on the south and 
west by Allied troops that have 
moved out of the town. Germans 
within the pocket are being sub- 
jected to the rapid and accurate 
fire of British 25-pounder field 
guns. 

The main assault, however, has 
|been launched in the Tilburg-Breda 
larea. Northwest of Tilburg, in- 
ifantry who had taken Sprang yes- 
terday captured Waalwijk today. 
Other forces moving north took 








MADISON AVENUE AT 46TH STREET 


AUTHENT 


7 


wide and has been established 
north of Oudenbosch, about five 
miles from the Moerdijk Bridge. 
On the extreme left flank of the 
northward movement the Cana-| 
dians are making slow progress 
against stiff opposition. By mid-| 
day they had advanced to within) 
2,006 yards of Steenbergen. The| 
Germans are trying to protect their 
withdrawal across the Meuse with 
mines, small delaying forces and 
an increasing number of snipers. 
The German Sixth Parachute Regi- 


No better fantasy than 


ment has been identified in this 
area, 

The heaviest fighting around the 
estuary of the Schelde was taking 
place on the causeway linking 
Walcheren Island and Zuid Bev- 
eland, where Anglo-Canadian Al- 
lied forces were making some 
progress along the Sloe Canal. The 
canal runs parallel with the cause- 
way, which is more than 1,000 
yards long and so stoutly con- 
structed that it will be virtually 
impossible for the Germans to de- 
stroy it. 

All of Zuid Beveland has now 


eg 


< 


**e.< ~~ 


— 


“0 << 


ee 


IC STYLES 


of ‘Distinction 


| 
scenes from his 





or fifteen seconds” the slight earth|dren have arrived in New Zealand 
tremor registered early today at|to be guests of the country for the 
Ottawa and also felt at Cornwall,|duration, it was announced today. 


istTors, as well as New Yorkers, have 


come to know that in our seven show windows, 


Ont., and Canton, N. Y. No dam- 
age was reported and it was indi- 
cated that only a few persons had 
been awakened by the tremor, 
which was timed at about 4:40 
A. M. 


|The Polish Government shipped 
|the children from Iran, where they 
jhad been living in national camps 
created after their long trek across 
Russia, They will live in a special- 
|ly constructed camp. 


EE ae 


Four dashing little bows to make your most 


comfortable hat your most becoming! 


Black, brown, 


red, grey, gold, cadet blue, Kelly green, or luggage 


tan wool felt. 


Fits all head sizes up to 23. 


Mail and phone orders filled. First Floor 





SIBLE FOR THE 


NOW ON REVIEW. BL 


ANCY 


LORING. 


ELEGANCE AND PLI.- 


RESULT ONLY 


FROM FINE HAND-TAI- 


THIS WORTHY 


ELEMENT, IN COMBINA- 
TION WITH ESPECIALLY 
RICH UNFINISHED WORS- 
TEDS AND OTHER FINE 
FABRICS IS RESPON- 


VERY IMPRESSIVE SUITS 


UB. GREY OR BROWN, 


NEW PLAIDS. STRIPES AND NEAT EFFECTS 


SINGLE OR DOUBLE-BREASTED 


*55 10°100 


New York, Fifth Ave. at 46th (19 





McCutcheon's, Fifth Avenue at 49th, New York 17, N. Y., VO. §-1000'j] 


" 


VC Ne 


Win 


Buy More Bonds 


:; Chicago, 19 E. Jackson Blvd. 4) 


distinctive character 





Frederick R. Tripler, who in 1886 inaugurated 


the policy of offering 


sensible prices 


Our clothes are made from specially selected 


quality imported and domestic woolens, and 


they will see unusual displays of clothing, 


furnishings and hats of enduring style and 


Our store, long noted for its personalized 
service, continues today under the direction 


of those who worked with the founder, 


ae 


*e <<, 


< 


the finest quality at 


ha 


en Neen 


— 09 «<< 
>>® 


carry the hand-tailoring of HICKEY-FREEMAN 


NEW YORK 





—there are no finer made 


They NEED MORE... 


We MUST DO MORE 
«+. through... 


WAR FU es 


| FER |RIP[ER & [0. 


OUTFITTERS T 


O GENTLEMEN 


Established 1886 
NEW YORK, I7 N.Y. 


Ditnenr 


Men’s ties, fanciful and color- 
ful—authentic Walt Disney 
studio designed rayon fabric 
featuring characters and 
famous 
movies—“‘Joe Carioca,” 
“Sombrero,” “Unicorn,” 
“Penguin” and the rest. All 
unusual and fine, 2.50 
©Walt Disney Productions 
Bloomingdale’s Men's Store, 
Street Floor 








Lexington at 59th, New York 22, N. Y. « VO 5-5900 
SNOWY 


NAAAA AAR ARAL SAAR NAAR AS 
PU UV VU VT Pee 


meer 
“under the clock” 


Up whore the blue hegine 
RAINBOW LOUNGE 


47 P.M. Daily. Closed Sundays & Nolidape 


sk @ A la Carte Mens 


et? @ Table dhote Tee 
Yo @ Cocktets 


OX « William Adler Ensemble 


RCA Building + 65th Floor South 
ROCKEFELLER CENTER 


itty 


WIIMAIZ 


NANA AN ARS 
WWW 


Enjoy your 
cocktail in 
the quiet of 


e@ « 


CTke SHERRY- 
NETHERIAND 


Fifth Avenue ot 59th St, New York 
AAAAA AAA LARAATD RAD AAA AS Anka 


=< 
—yy | . 
PUA AAA \ 


AP AAR RA AAP ABAD 
vey? Widiry 


PIRIULAAAAARAAR 
UVTI VV VY 


; 


™ 





RESORTS 

MIAMI BEACH 
THE — 1963 Alten Ro 
e MIAMI BEACH 


FOR THIS COMING 
ore. wren as£O 
WRITE MILTON RILLE Sormer’y gf © s£2% 


[NEW Vouk Grrice-cife “F-S 


LUNCHEON & DINNER + WA g-2)48 





MEN OF 50 NATIONS | 
MERT FOR AIR TALK* 


Chicago Parley Starts Today 
as Planned, Despite Russia’s 
Last-Minute Abstention 


By RUSSELL PORTER 
Special to Tus New York 
CHICAGO, Oct. 31—With the 
United States and Great Britain 
holding divergent views on how 
post-war commercial aviation 
should be controlled, delegations 
from fifty governments will open 
the international civil aviation con- 
ference here tomorrow. Despite the 
last-minute refusal of Russia to 
participate because of the at- 
tendance of Spain, Portugal and 
Switzerland, the conference will 
proceed as planned, with neutral as 
well as United and Associated Na- 
tions taking part. 

The main controversy is over the 
powers to be given by the various 
sovereign nations to the interna- 
tional air body or authority which 
is expected to materialize from the 
conference. Washington is strong- 
ly opposed to the London theory 
that the international body should 
have power to allocate routes and 
frequencies of service. 

Competition View Asserted 


The United States 
favors world-wide establishment of 
air routes and services, as soon as 
the war situation permits, open to 
all peaceful coutnries on the basis 
of frequencies of service to be de- 
cided by traffic needs. It wants) 
this country to be able to set up 
international rountes under certifi- 
cates from the Civil Aeronautics 
Board in Washington, without any 


TIMES 


delegation | 


KO 5 Znaymo 


3 fmm) ae 
AUSTRIA 


25 


Zt 


—_—— 
CALE OF MILES 


Advancing on a front between Tornyospalca; thus carving out a deep salient. 
the Russians recap-| they occupied Pirto station (5), on the Subotica- 
South of Budapest they | Budapest railroad. Soviet troops moving north 
along the Danube River occupied Kalocsa (6).| 


(1) 
tured Nyiregyhaza (2). 


and Hajdunanas (3), 


entered Ketskemet and pushed on to Izsak (4), 


this year—that the first essential 
to such 
“the 


of equality of rights supported by 


mutual good-will and not equality|t 
of power—for Utopia is danger-| 


ous.” 


an achievement must be 
acceptance of the principle} 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, 
RED ARMY ON THE MOVE TOWARD HUNGARIAN CAPITAL 


CZECHOSLOVAKIA) 


| transportation at something less | 
than 2.5 cents a ton-mile. 

The airplane is designed to carry 
| thirty to thirty-six passengers. At 
the usual rate of 200 pounds for 
leach passenger and his baggage, 
|this would provide a passenger rate 


= = 
a 


Kosice 4 


». 


ques 
Timisoara 


RUMANIA 


6 Vrbac 


Pancevo 


PPBEL RAD 


Bela Crkva 


Nov. 1, 1944 
To the south 


UNRRA SENDING GROUP 


TO POLAND FOR RELIEF 


Special | to Tue New Yorx« Times. 


WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—A re- 
lief delegation will soon go to lib- 


NOVEMBER 1, 


RED ARMY SMASHES 
TOWARD BUDAPEST 


Continued From Page 1 


points. Pulusk is forty-one miles 
below the East Prussian border. 

Berlin also conceded new major 
Red Army penetrations in Latvia 
as the Russians, with deeply stag- 
|gered waves of shock troops, ham- 
jmered German defense lines 
twenty miles southeast of the 
|Baltic escape port of Libau and 
|west of Auce, seventy-three miles 
east of Libau. 

The Soviet midnight communi- 
qué reported violent artillery ex- 
changes in East Prussia, where 
|Gen. Ivan D. Chernyakhovsky’s 
| Third White Russian Army was 
‘twe nty miles inside German terri- 
‘tory. German reconnaissance ac- 
| tivity was reported north of Gross 
Trakehnen, twtney-six miles east of 
Insterburg. 

Bitter hand-to-hand street fight- 
ing ranged in Kecskemet, Moscow 
General Malinovsky’s troops broke 
jinto the city of 84,000 persons 
jafter forcing the Tisza River at 
| Alpar, fifty-seven miles southeast 
|of Budapest, and advancing four- 
teen miles northwest through the 
|rail station of Koharyszentloerinc. 
Kecskemet is the last town of 
|importance before Budapest on the 
Belgrade-Budapest highway. Izsak 
jis forty-four miles southeast of 
Budapest. 

Between Izsak and Alpar, Gen- 
eral Malinovsky's troops were ad- 
vancing on Budapest along a 
pape mile front. West of Iszak, 
in extensive marsh country east of 
the Danube, German and Hun- 
|garian troops were offering stub- 
}born resistance on the Belgrade- 
Budapest railroad. 

The Russians, however, cleared 
‘a twenty-four-mile stretch of the 
/Danube’s east bank north of Baja 





1944. 


9,121 Election Districts 
Set in New York State 


By The Associated Press. 

ALBANY, Oct. 31—A total of 
9,121 election districts will be 
used in New York State for the 
general election. 

New York City’s five counties 
have 3,700 districts, while the 
rest of the State has 5,421. 

The number of districts in the 
counties of New York and those 
near by are as follows: 


Bronx ..... 734)Orange.... 
Kings |Rockland .. 
Manhattan. ‘910| Suffolk .... 
Queens .... °767|Sullivan ... 
Richmond.. 109} Ulster 

Dutchess ..  92| Westchester 404 
Nassau .... 318! 


RUMANIAN SHAKE-UP SEEN 


Soviet Radio Reports Mass Dem- 
onstrations Against | Government 


LONDON, Wednesday, Nov. 1 
(®)—The Rumanian Government of 
Gen. Konstantin Sanatescu, which 
signed the armistice with the Unit- 
ed Nations, appeared in danger as 
the Moscow radio early today re- 
ported mass demonstrations in 
Bucharest demanding its replace- 
ment by a government organized 
by the Rumanian National Demo- 
cratic front. 


114 
57 
196 


The Moscow domestic radio said 
yesterday that the Rumanian Gov- 
ernment had failed to carry out a 
satisfactory purge of pro-Fascist 
elements and asserted that, al- 
though more than 500 members of 
the Fascist Iron Guard had been 
arrested, “considerably larger 
numbers still are free.” 

The broadcast, reported by the 
Office of War Information, added 
that much farm equipment, in- 
cluding 2,000 tractors, plundered 
by the Rumanians in Russia, was 
being overhauled and returned to 
the Russian Government. 


$3,312,154 IS RAISED 
FOR BAPTIST PROGRAM 


New funds for post-war expan- 
sion totaling $3,312,154 have been! 
received in campaigns by thirty-| 
five Baptist schools, colleges and 
seminaries, Dr. Luther: Wesley 
Smith, executive secretary of the 
board of education of the North- 
ern Baptist Convention, announced 
yesterday. 

These funds came to Baptist 
educational institutions as the re- 
sult of a “new development pro- 
gram” initiated in 1942, which 
reached its active phase on May 1, 
1943, ‘the previous period having 
been devoted primarily to surveys | 
and the preparation of an inten- 
sive nation-wide publicity pro-| 
gram,” according to a statement 
from the Northern Baptist Conven- 
tion yesterday. More than $2,000,- 
00 was raised the first year. 

Yesterday's statement covere d| 
reports from presidents of thirty- | 
five institutions. Many other cam- 
paigns' were just getting under 
way. 

Funds thus received, according 
to the statement, were raised 
among the constituencies of the 
several institutions to meet a vari- 
ety of needs, such as new chapels, | 
dormitories, libraries, endowments, | 
lectureships, physical education 
units and administration buildings. 





Degree Conferred on C.F.Jenkins| 


Special to Tuz New York Times. 

PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 31—The 
University of Pennsylvania con- 
ferred today on Charles F. Jenkins, 
publisher, author and president of 
the board of managers of Swarth- 
more College, the honorary degree 
of Doctor of Laws. Mr. Jenkins, 
who also is precent of the Penn- 
Sylvania Historical Society and) 
chairman of the William Penn Ter- 
centenary Committee, was praised| \ 
by Dr. George McClelland, presi- 
dent of the university, for his 
faithful service in the interest of 
educational and charitable insti- 
tutions. 


L + 
Rogers Peet™ 


| 


Today, Airplane Stamp 
No. 3 in Book 3, becomes 
lavailable for the shoes 
you need! 

We know no finer shoes 
than our own exclusive 
lasts by Johnston 
|Murphy. 

Expert fitters. 


x 


a 


Other Rogers Peet 
leather shoes, $8.65 to $21.5 


Me ge 


Patil OL hal yolls é haraclih 


al 


, 
~ 
J. 


Ave. at 
Ljtt St 
Warren St. 
Tremont St 


‘ 
* 6B 
‘B 


Gimbels open 


—their last reported position—and 
captured Kalocsa, sixty miles south 
lof Budapest. Malinovsky’s troops 
|now are in control of an almost 
inistrati otf today continuous 180-mile stretch of 
SUSTeren, & pie the Danube’s east bank between 
The project has been undertaken! Kalocsa and Belgratle. 
in accordance with the desires of Moscow's war bulletins did not 
both the Polish Government 1D|report the capture of the major 


of a quarter of a cent a mile, as 
against the present average of 5 
cents a passenger-mile. 

Martin, known as a conserva- 
n| tive in airplane design, has claimed 
"| that the Mars, now flying for the 
| Navy, operates at about 6 cents 

a ton-mile. The new figure for the 
|Mercury, a _ twin-engined plane 


let or hindrance from and “super- 
state,” and is willing and eager to} 
give other nations the same rights | 
to operate in competition with} 
United States air lines. 

A. A. Berle Jr., head 
Untied States delegation, 


Russia, it is held, has negated| 
that “mutual good-will” by plac- 
ing itself on the field of ideologi- 
ical antagonism with which it a 
parently hopes to gain time 
| which “to decide where to place its| 
plums of geo-political ssion| 

exchange for which it plans to! 


erated Poland, Herbert H. Lehman, 
Director Genera] of the United Na- 
tions Relief and Rehabilitation Ad- 





Gimbels all-wool pullovers 


of the 


has ac 


conce 


cepted the principle of “cabotage,’ 
under which American ] 
n . compete for business between 
two points within any foreign 
country, and under which forei ign 
lines shall not compete for traffic 
within the United States. Ameri- 
can international airlines would 
operate chiefly as “express” routes 
between the principal cities of the 
world. 

The United States also proposes 
an agreement for the control of 
rates and competitive practices, 
by some such means as the in- 
ternational shipping conferencs 
which have regulated steamship 
rates for many years. A similar 
international organization of air 
line .perators, representing all 
countries concerned, would be 
set up. 

Washington recognizes that 
British and other foreign aviation 
leaders fear American post-war 
competition as a result of the tre- 
mendous impetus our aviation in- 
dustry has received from the war 
and our unequaled productive ca- 
pacity. It replies that American 
manufacturers are not only will-| 
ing but eager to sell transport} 
planes to other countries so that 
the latter can compete with this 
country’s air lines Moreover, 
says Washington, this Government 
will have a surplus of two-motor | 
war transports after the end of 
hostilities, anc expects to make 
them available to foreign coun- 
tries at the same time as to do- 
mestic air lines. 

The Washington delegation lays 
stress on the reciprocal natur: 
its proposals. It emphasizes that 
this country is not seeking any 
rights it will not extend to others. | 
No country that gives us landing 
rights on its soil will be denied 
landing rights in the United States. 


British Bases Are a Factor 


Both sides hold high cards in the 
international poker game about to 
begin here. Washington has the 
huge wartime accumulation of 
transport planes, the “know-how” 
of American aviation personnel, | 
and the great business potential of 
American business and _ tourist 
traffic. The British have their 
bases all over the world. The 
French, Netherlanders and Portu- 
guese also have important trading} 
positions in their possessions on 
world air routes. 

The refusal of Russia to attend 
the conference is regarded in offi- 
cial circles as less important than 
appears on the surface. It is not 
believed that Moscow has scuttled 
the idea of international coopera- 
tion in general. Despite her vast 
territory, Russia is off the main 
air routes now contemplated for 
the post-war world. Thus she 
could not hope to gain, much, if 
anything, from the conference, and 
might lose by agreeing to let for- 
eign planes fly over her territory 
or by taking a stand against such 
an agreement. 


lanes will 


ot 


SOVIET ACT PUZZLES SWISS | 


Officials Say Little, but Others 
See Policy Run by ‘Passion’ 


By Telephone to THz New York Tim 

BERNE, Switzerland, Oct. 
Russia’s about-face before the 
Chicago aviation conference has 
aroused no more than passing 
“consternation” among authorita- 
tive Swiss circles, which admit, 
however, that they are at a loss 
for the “real reason” for Moscow’s 
abstention from a conference on 
the results of which so much for 
the immediate reconstruction of 
wartorn Europe depends. 

Frequent reference to official 
utterances by Switzerland’s chief 
of the Federal Political Depart- 
ment, Pilet-Golaz, in the press, 
however, make it clear that the 
general reaction of the man in the 
street is that Moscow has allowed 
its foreign policy to be “guided by 
passion”—or cupidity—and in 
doing has committed the first of 
cardinal sins against ‘‘true inter- 
national collaboration.”’ 

The Swiss Federal Council, which 
protests ever having fundamen- 
tally opposed a resumption of rela- 
tions with Russia, has always con- 
tended both before Parliament and! 


the notinn the lact ti 


ES 


31 


SO 


, to 
S 


get more than it gives.’ 


MARTIN MAKING NEW PLANE 
Goal Is Operating Cost So Low 
It Can Campete With Railroads 


Special to THe New York TIMES 

CHICAGO, Oct. 31—The Glenn| 
L. Martin Company of Baltimore 
announced today a new airplane 
with an operating cost so low that 
it can compete with the railroads, 

Known as the Martin Mercury, 
its direct flying costs, according 
the company’s engineers, are 
only 1.15 cents a ton-mile. Adding 
more than 100 per cent of 
direct flying cost for ground estab- 
lishment, traffic solicitation, over-| 
head and interest 
cess of the usual airline cost 
the Martin engineers 
the Mercury can 


aaa an 
>— 


don’t stop 


prac 
tice 


that provide 


the | 


a figure in ex-|States.” Endorsing Mr. 


omnert lissues 


bye an ideal range of 700 miles, 


so much lower than anything 
that American designers have yet 
forecast, and infinitely lower than 
jany flying costs projected by for- 
jeign designers, 
| the technological superiority of the 
|United States in all its dealings 
for post-" war pair traffic. 


Monitor Endorses tiniie 
Special to Tue New Yorx Times. 
BOSTON, Oct. 31—The Christ- 
lian Science Monitor announced ed- 
litorially today its support of Gov- 
ernor Dewey for the Presidency on 
“the conclusion that the election of 
Dewey would better 
welfare of the United 
Dewey on 
and domestic 
declared 





|Governor 
serve the 


both foreign policy 
the Monitor 
lagainst a fourth term. 


we know you know 


these tricks 


Which lines are longer? Of course you've seen 
these tricks before, but they’re still good. They're 
still dramatic proof of the miracle of difference 
a few lines can make. The reason we bring it up 


again, is that lines are 
paper or on you.. And 


lines, whether they’re on 
the same rules work. 


The cannily conceived lines of a Goodman and 
Suss suit will do as much for you as the long-mak- 
ing lines in the optical illusions above. Of course, 
the stripes in the suit shown here do a lot to help. 
But the cut of the lapels, the drape of the jackets, 
the die-true hang of the trousers make you look 
taller and leaner, no matter which Goodman and 
Suss suit you happen to be wearing. 


Goodman and Suss suits have a tactful way, too, 
of making you narrower in the middle and broader 


in the shoulders. 


Subtle scissors work and the 


discreet use of shoulder padding account for this 


friendly camouflage. 


You won't find an obvious, 


overemphasized line in Gimbels whole assortment 
of Goodman and Suss suits. You may buy them 
on our easy payment plan. Small service charge. 


Gimbels Men’s Department. 


Lounge models 


Sixth Floor. 
are $50 and $60. 


that it points up| 


London and the Russian-approved 
Polish Committee of National Lib- 
eration in Lublin, it was stated, 


John P. Gregg, former]? chief of | 


staff for the operating divisions of 
the War Production Board, has 
been transferred to the UNRRA 
staff, and will head the delegation. 
It will survey the needs and work 
out the operating arrangements 
for providing relief suppligs and! 
services to liberated Polish people. 

Included in the delegation will 
be men experienced in the fields of 
supply, public health, displaced 
persons and welfare operations. 
The first tasks to be taken up are 
those of supply and transport. 
group of technical experts will 
form the nucleus of the UNRRA 
operating mission when the flow of 
goods and services to Poland has 
been started. 


'22-POINT HAND-TAILORED” 


Exclusive with Gimbels 


83rd Strect and 


Broadway, New York 1, N. Y. 


This} 


five-point rail and ten-way high- 
way junction of Kiskunfelegyhaza, 
fourteen miles southeast of Kec- 
skemet behind the front. 





| In northeastern Hungary, after 
a ten-day see-saw battle in which 
the strategic rail junction changed 
hands’ several times, Russian 
troops recaptured Nyiregyhaza 
and killed up to 1,500 enemy 
troops. Malinovsky'’s forces were 
| striving to regain a thirty-mile-| 
long foothold on the east bank of 
the Tisza, from where they could 
cross the river and drive toward) 
3udapest. 

Yugoslav Partisan forces have 
begun attacking the big naval base 
of Boka Kotorska, on the Yugoslav 
coast near the Albanian border, 
which is large enough to accommo- 
date the entire British Fleet, | 
Marshal Tito announced. 





—GIMBELS OPEN THURSDAY till 9— 


are fine for Christmas 


3.99 


Now’s the time to rustle up 


Christmas presents 
men in your life. 


for the 


This is no 


year to overload mailing and 


shipping facilities. 


These 


sweaters will feel warm even if 
the radiator takes a holiday 


too. 


They’re all wool—every 


soft springy fiber is wool— 
which means that they keep 
you warm and toasty with- 
out ever weighing you down. 


The sweaters 


are knit in a 


handsome panel rib with snug 


ribbed waists and cuffs. 


The 


wool is slightly brushed—not 


enough to be fuzzy 


but just 


enough to give extra insulation 
against the cold. Small, medi- 
um, and large sizes in a soft 
tan that blends with any other 


color. Write or phone. 


Sixth Fl. 


shipping charge 130 


GIMBELS—OFFICIAL AGENTS FOR 


NAVAL 


*40 


UNIFORM SERVICE 


Gimbels has 
blue serge 


officers’ 


uniforms 


There’s 


nothing tougher than all 


wool blue serge for day-in day-out 


wear. And 


keeps its shape better without 
extra finger-flick of trouble. 


there’s nothing os 


Our 


L? 
nNerniv 


blue serge uniforms are superbly 


tailored with clean, 


1° 
nNeac 


ii1ite 


crisp 


They sit lightly on your shoulders; 


they’re molded gently 
Made under supervis 


comfort. 
of the U. S. 


wnollre 
VOuT 


ie 
Sixth Floor. 


for 


Navy. 


navy raincoats, button-in-linings 


navy bridge coats 
with 


officers’ 
broadcloth shirt 


caps 


grey chino unifor 


white uniforms 


c 


blue overseas 


af 


te 


Mm 


grey overseas caps 


white cap-covers 


Wright Arch-Pre: 


erv 





16 L+ 


TRUMAN, WALLACE 
AT LIBERAL RALLY 


Continued From Page 1 


whistles and cries of “Wallace in 
1948”. resounded while he vainly} 
tried to quiet the crowd to avoid| 
the loss of radio time. 

Wants Party “Truly Liberal” 

“Every minute of this is costing | 
somebody money,” he observed as| 
he motioned with his hands to the| 
audience to be silent. A few min- 
utes later, however, he gave an in- 
dication of his own future political | 
plans by saying: 

“This has been and is a people's 
war. The peace must be a people's | 
peace. The way to get it is to re-| 
elect Roosevelt and then make the| 
Democratic party into a truly lib- | 
eral party.” 

Senator Robert F. Wagner, whol 
was warmly praised by both Sena- 
tor Truman and Vice President 
Wallace, headed a long list of addi- 
tional speakers at the meeting,| 
which was also marked by the ap-| 
pearance of numerous Broadway | 
celebrities, including Frank Sina-!| 
tra, Bill Robinson, Ethel Merman, | 
Benay Venuta. Jan Kiepura a. 
Victor Borge. 

Mr. Sinatra and Mr. Robinson/ 
both made speeches in support of | 
President Roosevelt, to the dismay 
of some of those present, who kept| 
calling upon them to offer their 
specialties. Mr. Sinatra said that 
he had been warned that his politi- 
cal activities would hurt his 
career. 

“Well, the hell with that,” he} 
added. “I’m more interested in| 
good government than in my own 
future.” 

Mr. Robinson remarked that “I 
like Mr. Roosevelt because Mr.} 
Roosevelt likes my kind of people”’ 
and then grabbed Mr. Sinatra and 
led him to the microphone. 

“This meeting wouldn’t be per- 
fect, Frank,” he said, “unless you) 
sing two choruses of ‘T’'ll Be Seeing | 
You,’ and I dance them.” | 

Sinatra yielded’ and took his} 
place at the microphone, while the} 
celebrated tap dancer improvised| 
steps to match the singing. Then 
the two men exchanged places and| 
Mr. Robinson sang while the 
younger man tried feebly to imi- 
tate his steps. 


Tribute Paid to Willkie 


Dr. John L. Childs, State chair-/| 
man of the Liberal party, presid- 
ed over the mass meeting, and 
other speakers included Russell W. 
Davenport, a close associate of the 
late Wendell L. Willkie during the 
1940 campaign. At the request of 
Dr. Childs, the audience rose and 
stood for a minute in silence in 
tribute to Mr. Willkie. 

“Mr. Willkie was greatly inter- 
ested in the formation of the Liber-| 
al Party,” Dr. Childs said. “He} 
was the trusted friend and adviser | 
of the leaders of the Liberal Party. | 

Dean Alfange, who was the 1942) 
gubernatorial candidate of the) 
American Labor party and is now} 
vice chairman of the Liberal party; | 
David, Dubinsky, president of the) 
International Ladies Garment} 
Workers Union; the Rev. Dr.) 
Reinhold Niebuhr, professor of| 
Christian Ethics at Union Theo- 
logical Seminary; Dr. Channing} 
Tobias, and Rabbi Stephen S. Wise| 
were the other speakers at me} 
meeting. 

Senator Truman and Senator 
Wagner both accused Governor 
Dewey and the Republican party 
of appealing to prejudice during 
the campaign. 

“Governor Dewey and his cam-| 
paign managers have encouraged, 
as part of their political strategy, | 
a vicious and un-American cam-} 
paign directed against Americans} 
of foreign birth,” Senator Truman 
charged. “They have refused to 
repudiate those who seek to fan} 
the flame of racial and religious| 
bigotry.” j 

Senator Wagner was equally| 
condemnatory, saying that Gov-) 
ernor Dewey had been making 
“wild charges,” and adding: 

“Any man who would approve or 
tolerate a campaign based upon 
an appeal to religious prejudice— 
which is at the bottom of the Re- 
publican shouting about everyone} 
with a foreign name who is sup- 
porting President Roosevelt—lacks 
the consistency to be President.” 


Truman Lauds President 


Senator Truman contrasted “the| 
dismal Republican record” with) 
that of the President in foreseeing | 
the war and preparing for it. He| 
charged that Governor Dewey‘ 
wanted to “throw out the leader 
who warned us against danger,” 
and had specifically endorsed “the | 
eight isolationist Republican Sen-| 
ators who are up for re-election.” 

He maintained that President} 











| 


the 


| decision. 


| posed by 


| Congress voted against that 


Excerpts Fr 


Excerpts from the addresses of WALLACE AND TRUMAN AT RALLY LAST NIGHT | 


| Senator Harry 8. Truman, Demo- 
|cratic nominee for the Vice Presi- 

|dency, 
they gave Vice President Wallace| Wallace and Senator Robert F. 


a much wilder ovation. Shouts and| Wagner at the mass meeting of 
Madison 


| Square Garden last night follow: 


Vice President Henry 


Liberal party in 


Senator Truman 


Tonight I am happy to share 
this platform with two great 
Americans, Henry Wallace and 
Bob Wagner. Two men who per- 
sonify democracy to all the world 
—whose entire energies are en- 
listed in the cause of progress. 
One week from tonight 
American people will find them- 
selves faced with a momentous 
They must decide 
whether the interest of their 
country and the freedom and hap- 
piness of their children will best 
be served by discarding their 


Commander in Chief, and replac- | 
ing him with a man of no ex- | 


perience. * * * 

President Roosevelt, in 1933, 
started to rebuild our Navy—the 
Navy that is right now blasting 
the Japs out of the Pacific. 

In 1937 Roosevelt called for a 
quarantine of aggressors, and for 
this was denounced by the Repub- 
lican party as a warmonger. 

In 1939 Roosevelt called for har- 
bor improvements at the island of 
Guam, and was turned down by 
Republican votes in Congress. 

In 1939, he called for repeal of 
the arms embargo, and was op- 
the vast majority 
Republicans in both houses. 

In 1940 he asked for selective 
service to build an army, and 
again was opposed by the great 
majority of Republicans in House 
and Senate. 

In 1941 he called for lend-lease, 
so that America’s potential allies 
might be kept in the war against 
Hitler, and once again was op- 
posed by most of the Republicans 
in both houses. 

In 1941, he requested an exten- 
sion of selective service, and 
again, on the eve of Pearl Har- 
bor, almost every Republican in 
ex- 
tension—or in other words, voted 
to disband our growing Army. 

In the face of this dismal Repub- 
lican record, Governor Dewey's 


only answer is that it’s time for | 


a change. I agree with him—it’s 
time to change some of the isola- 


tionist faces in. the Senate and | 


the House. 
But Governor Dewey’s desire 


for change evidently extends only | 


to the office of President. He de- 
mands that we throw out the 
leader who warned us against 
danger and prepared us for war. 
But the eight isolationist Repub- 
lican Senators who are up for re- 
election—these he specifically en- 
dorses. * * * 


Quotes Stimson’s Praise 


Perhaps the most concise de- | 


scription of the President's war 
leadership was that given by our 
great Republican Secretary of 
War, Henry L. Stimson, not in a 
political speech but in an address 
to the alumni of Harvard Univer- 
sity. Secretary Stimson said—and 
unlike Mr. Dewey I quote his re- 
marks fully and correctly: 

“TI think it is appropriate that 
here at the home of his alma 
mater I should say a word as to 


the leadership of that Harvard 


man who is the Commander in 
Chief of this great Army. It has 
been my privilege to observe him 


in time of conference and of crisis | 


and of incessant strain and bur- 
den, of which he has cheerfully 
borne by far the heaviest share. 


| His clarity of foresight and his 


unfailing grasp of the essential 
strategic factors of a world-wide 
struggle, you have been able to 
follow. But only those who have 
been his lieutenants in the strug- 
gle can know the close personal 


attention with which he has vital- | 


ized every important decision. 


And only they can fully appre- | 
ciate the courage and determina- | 


tion he has shown in time of 
threatened disaster, or the loyalty 
and consideration by which he 
has won the support of all of his 
war associates. Out of 
characteristics comes the leader- 
ship which will achieve the final 
victory.”’ 


Sees Roosevelt as Symbol 


Yes, the American people will 
agree with Mr. Stimson that ‘‘out 
of these characteristics comes the 
leadership which will achieve the 
victory.’’ They are characteris- 
tics which Mr. Roosevelt pos- 
sesses and which Mr. 


a national asset which this na- 
tion cannot afford to waste * * *. 

I am _ proud that Franklin 
Roosevelt today exemplifies, not 
only in America but in the hearts 
of millions of all nations, this 
democratic faith. 

The President has kept this 
faith; he remains the symbol of 
democracy, not only in the hearts 
of those who love democracy, but 
as well in the hearts of those who 
hate freedom. 


That is why the forces of racial | 
the | 


and religious intolerance, 
exponents of bigotry and preju- 
dice, bear toward our President 
a venomous and undying hatred. 

In supporting the President in 
these broad programs for human 


| liberty and tolerance, no man in 


the Senate of the United States 


A. 


of | 


these | 


| paign issue was exploded by a 


Dewey | 
does not possess. They constitute | 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER lI, 1944. 


the | 





The Vice President and the Democratic candidate on the platform 


in Madison Square Garden. 


has a more consistent voting rec- | returns will be coming in from | 
: _ | New York City. 
More than six years ago, Presi- | 


ord than myself. 


| dent Roosevelt advocated a Fed- 
eral anti-lynching law. 

More than six years ago, I cast 
my vote in the Senate for a Fed- 
eral anti-lynching law. 

More than five years ago, Mr. 
Roosevelt went on record in favor 


of Federal legislation to outlaw | 


the poll tax—and, on numerous 


occasions, I have cast my vote in | 


fevor of such legislation. 

President Roosevelt established 
the Fair Employment 
Committee to prevent 
crimination, 

The President now proposes 
permanent legislation to main- 
tain the open door in industry. 
I have always voted in favor of 
| appropriations for the Fair Em- 
ployment Practices Committee. 


Charges ‘‘Double Talk’’ 


job dis- 


hand, has tried to beguile us with 
double talk. 

He favors 
lynching, but conveniently omits 
to say whether it shall be Federal 
or Statg legislation. 

He opposes the poll tax, but 
proposes that its destruction shall 
be delayed by the cumbersome 
and stalling device of a Consti- 
tutional amendment. 

He praises the Fair Employ- | 
ment Practices Committee, but 
| in the New York Legislature, he 

employed all the power of a ruth- 
| less Republican machine to de- 
| feat legislation creating a Fair 

Employment Practices Commit- 

tee for New York State. 

Governor Dewey and his cam- 
| paign managers have encouraged, 
as a part of their political strat- | 
egy, a vicious and un-American 
campaign directed against Amer- 
icans of foreign birth. 

They have refused to repudiate | 
those who seek to fan the flame 
of racial and religious bigotry. 

This is the way democracy and 
equality were undermined in 
other lands. 
| In the years to come we must | 
| learn to trust one another. 

Who is better fitted to lead us 
in paths of faith and understand- 
ing than Franklin Roosevelt? His 
| humanity knows neither Jew nor 

gentile, Catholic nor Protestant, 
| black man nor white man—but 
only his fellow-man. 

He has strength and under- 
standing. 

He is a statesman. 

He is qualified as no other 
American is qualified, to lead our 
people to victory in war and to 
progress in peace. 


Vice President Wallace 


It is good weather here tonight. 
But ten days ago here in New 
York the biggest Republican cam- 











great rain and windstorm. What 
a joy it is to have a leader that 
can rise to any emergency wheth- 
er a bankrupt country in 1933, a 
war in 1941, or a driving rain- 
storm in Greater New York. 

There is one more rain and one 
more cold in the head. But 
this time it will be a rain of bal- 
lots Nov. 7 for Roosevelt, and a 
cold in the head for the big money 
men behind Dewey. It took a 
rain to show up these mental 
whiners and snifflers. But don’t 
forget, rain or shine to vote Nov. 
7 for victory, for permanent 
peace, and for full employment 
with Franklin Delano Roose- 
velt. * e+ * 

Tonight the sands in the hour 
glass are running low. Six days 
of work are left. A week hence 
we shall al] be sitting around the 
radio again. It will be a big 
night, more exciting than the sev- 
enth game of a world series, as 
important to the world as a big 
| naval battle or the crumbling of 
| the Hitler Westwall. 

We will listen breathlessly. The 








Practices | 


Governor Dewey, on the other | 





legislation against 


| considerations. 


| give you all jobs. 


| terprise and everything 


Associated Press 


know whether the majority here 
is big enough to counteract what 
is coming from up-State. Yet, the 
up-State boys have done a splen- 
did job, in some ways the best in 
the history of the State. But you 
know what they are up against 
and it is up to you to do your 
part right here in New York City 
to get the vote out as it has never 
been gotten out before. As you 
bend over your radios a week 


Soon we shall | 
|} emerged as a brand new 


| have to grow new Wagners. But | 


Wagner than 365 mediocre days 
of any other man. There are to 


| be in the peace days ahead more 


Wagner Acts. The people have an 
unceasing need of champions. 
The Senate of the United States 
in the next six years will need 


| men of straight drive and simple 


courage. You will have to have a 
Wagner for every Taft. You will 


| there is no man to fill Wagner's 








place now. The times are too ur- 
gent; the need is too immediate. 
New York, I am sure, has voters 
who know these things better 
than I, 

God grant that next Tuesday 
evening you may have no regrets 
and that by midnight you can 
heave a sigh of relief and say, “I 
did my part. The country is safe 
for four more years with Roose- 
velt."’ 


Senator Wagner 


My memory takes me back to 
a good many elections. But I 
cannot recall a single instance 
where the opinions of a Presi- 
dential candidate, at the time of 
his nomination, were as deep a 
secret as those of Mr. Dewey. 

This »was not an accident. The 
Republican strategy was to select 
a man whose opinions could be 
manufactured and molded as oc- 
casion demanded in the course of 
the campaign. They wanted a 
candidate who would accept, as 
his own, the synthetic package 
turned out by his publicity men. 

In the balmy air of California 
a few weeks ago Mr. Dewey 
New 
Dealer—as an advocate of social 
legislation and international co- 
operation. 

It ‘was an amusing sight. The 
change was made faster than a 
vaudeville artist puts on a set of 
false whiskers. Of course, Presi- 
dent Roosevelt laughed at this 


| vaudeville act—and the American 


from now with your hearts pump- | 


ing madly, who do you want to 
hear has carried New York State 
—Bricker and Dewey, or Truman 
and Roosevelt? * * * 


Reactionaries Criticized 


Some people tell me that here | 


and there you can find someone 
sulking 


in his tent because he | 


doesn’t like something a reaction- | 


ary Democrat has done. Well, 


neither Truma r Rooseveltisa | 
; hee eee | doubt in the hearts of our sol- 


reactionary Democrat. Moreover, 
I say to you that if any reaction- 
ary Democrat has offended you 
he has probably offended me a 
thousand times as much. But I 
want to say to you that I am out 
working with all brands of Demo- 


|} crats who are in favor of Roose- 
velt. 


We must lift our vision from the | : 
| to imply that the great and suc- 


| cessful 


little things to the overmastering 
I have nothing 
against a Dewey who would wear 
Roosevelt shoes. He is a bright 
young man. He studied the law 
and learned how to put gangsters 
in jail. That is fine; we need 
men of this sort and we have 
men of this sort. But we don’t 
need to put them in the White 
House when they are too young 
to know anything about war, the 
making of peace after the war, or 
the calming of the economic 
storms which inevitably follow a 
war. We still have a war to win. 
Every sane person knows that 
Roosevelt can do a better job of 
winning that war than Dewey. 


| We still have a peace to write, 


and all well-informed people 
know that Roosevelt’s broad ex- 
perience in international affairs 
makes him infinitely the stronger 
man in this field, 

“Ah,” in effect says Prosecutor 
Dewey, ‘“‘I shall make Wall Street 
happy and then Wall Street will 
Just flash the 
green light to American free en- 
will be 
fine in the post-war world.” 
really believes it. Folks, it is a 
case of being hypnotized by in- 
fluential, wealthy backers. * * * 

Of course Prosecutor Dewey is 
patriotic, intelligent, and fine in 
every way. But the war is a seri- 
ous matter and the problems of 
peace are grievous. The people of 
New York have two well-known 
citizens and they should do their 
duty by each one. They should 
keep their Governor in Albany 
and their President, whose expe- 
rience so richly qualifies him to 
be there, in the White House. 
Thus we may promote the pros- 
perity of New York State, the 
United States, and the world. 


Wants a People’s Peace 


This has been and is a people’s 
war. The peace must be a peo- 
ple’s peace. The way to get it is 
to re-elect Roosevelt and then 
make the Democratic party into 
a truly liberal party. 

Here I wish with you to value 
the help that Roosevelt has had. 
One man can’t go it alone. There 
is today in the Senate a strong 
man of the plain people. His name 
is Robert Wagner. They say that 
Robert Wagner can't take it after 
forty years of unfaltering work 
for common folks. Will it take a 


| blizzard and a rain to nail this 


one too? I would rather have in 
the Senate one appearance a year 
of the mind and body and great 
spiritual wisdom of the giant Bob 


public laughed with him. 

The papers report that Mr. 
Dewey was nettled at this laugh- 
ter. I should have said ‘‘rattled.’’ 
Because, like a rattled baseball 
player, he began to throw wild 
pitches and to hit fouls. 


Calls Dewey Charges “Wild” 


My friends, it is worth while to 
reflect on some of Mr. Dewey’s 
wild charges—not because anyone 
believes them, but because they 
throw light on his candidacy. 

Any man who, to satisfy his 
hunger for office, would plant 


| diers as they face the enemy’s 





fire—who would plant anxiety in 
the hearts of their mothers, wives 
and sweethearts by the malicious 
concoction that we plan to keep 
them in the Army beyond the ne- 
cessities of war—that man cannot 
be allowed to become President. 
Any man who is so reckless as 


plan to fight Germany 
first and Japan second was the 
result of a conspiracy—a con- 
spiracy on the part of General 
Marshall, General Eisenhower, 
Admiral Nimitz and the President 
to hinder General MacArthur's 
political ambitions—that man is 
unfit to be made Commander in 
Chief of the American Army and 
Navy. 

Any man who would approve or 
tolerate a campaign based upon 
an appeal to religious prejudice— 


| which is at the bottom of the Re- 


He | 


publican shouting about everyone 
with a foreign name who is sup- 
porting President Roosevelt—that 
man lacks the very first qualifi- 
cation for leading our great de- 
mocracy. 

Any man who with his lips calls 
the Wagner Act a good and nec- 
essary law, while he stretches out 
his palm to receive the campaign 
contributions of the men who 
have sworn to destroy that law, 
lacks the consistency to be Pres- 
ident. 

Any man who declares that the 
chief solution for the problems 
that lie ahead is to restore the 
“economic climate’’ that prevailed 
under Herbert Hoover, is just too 
preposterous to be President. * * * 


Sees Crisis for Nation 


Today, we are emerging from 
another crisis in the life of our 
nation—a crisis created by the 
madness of our enemies. Today, 
your sons and mine are fighting 
to make this nation secure 
against the recurrence of war. 
Under the leadership of President 
Roosevelt, the war is being con- 
ducted with such determination, 
skill and success as to evoke the 
admiration of the world. 

In this state of affairs, I would 
no more think of switching from 
Roosevelt to Dewey, than I would 
fire the experienced doctor who 
had twice pulled me through, in 
favor of a green, talkative and 
puffed-up medical student * * *. 

My reasons for seeking another 
term in the United States Senate 
are written into the record of 
what I have already done. My 
plans for the future are not vague 
promises. They can be found in 
bills which I have already intro- 
duced, and which I shall continue 
to fight for when Congress meets 
again. But it is only fair that I 
should briefly summarize my in- 
tentions. 

As a member of the Senate 
Committee on Foreign Relations, 
I want to go back there to coun- 








teract the isolationists on the 
committee—the men who would 
be in the saddle if Dewey were 
elected President. I stand four- 
square in favor of the peace prin- 
ciples and peace methods set 
forth so masterfully by the Presi- 
dent during his last visit to New 
York. I want, particularly, to 
fight for a generous policy of 
American aid in the relief and re- 
habilitation of stricken individ- 
uals and ruined nations—so that 
America may set a humanitarian 
example, and so that our own 
prosperity may be increased by 
world prosperity. I want to fight 
for the integrity of the smaller 
nations and for the restoration of 
their boundaries. 

I want to go back to the Senate 


to build further upon the Social | 


Security Act, which I sponsored 
in 1935. 
fight for the passage of the Wag- 
ner-Murray Dingell Social Se- 
curity Bill, so that the blessings 


| 
| 


I want you to help me | 


of better social security may be 
brought to every American fam- 
ily. 
For Better Housing 

I want to go back to the Senate 
to insist upon the expansion of 
the slum clearance and liow-rent 
housing program, which I spon- 
sored before the war. That will 


be a hard fight—because the Re- | 
publicans have lined up consist- | 
ently against decent housing for | 


the average American family. 
I know that the reactionary 
campaign to destroy the National 


Labor Relations Act will be re- | 
sumed with double intensity after | 


the war. I want to go back to 


help protect the right to collective | 


bargaining which has made the 
worker a free man. 


The small business men of this | 


State and nation, as well as the 
small farmers, were too long ex- 
ploited by monopolies and by high 
finance, just as the worker had 
been exploited, during the long 


| Negro, 


om Truman, Wallace and Wagner Speeches at Liberal Rally in Garden 


years of Republican influence. I 
want to build upon the laws that 
I have already sponsored, to help 
the small business man and the 
farmer maintain their rightful 
place in our economy. 

The treatment of the American 
despite the unequaled 
gains made during the Roosevelt 
Administration, is still a crying 
shame and disgrace. I want to 
continue my fight for the aboli- 
tion of the poi] tax, for @ perma- 
nent Fair Employment Practices 
Committee, and for a Federal 
anti-lynching law. 

I shall be deeply grateful for 
whatever assistance you may fee! 
justified in extending to me on 
election day. 

But above all, I want to ask you 
to make a superhuman effort to 
get out every possible vote 
the re-election of the world’s 
greatest leader in the cause of 
democracy—Franklin D. RFoose- 
velt. 


for 


PEOPLE ARE ASKING: 


“Will current reconversion plans 
Shorten the time | must wait 
for home telephone service?” 


As Allied armies in Europe press forward, you read of 
plans for some curtailment of war production and start of 
manufacture of peacetime products. 

That is why people are asking: “How will Germany’s 
defeat affect my chances of getting a telephone?” 


x 7 7 


There are now about 190,000 families on the waiting lists 
of the New York Telephone Company. 
Approximately 55,000 of them live in areas where we 
could install service if we had telephone instruments. 
The other 135,000 are in areas where there is a shortage, 
not only of telephone instruments, but of switchboards and 
other central office equipment as well. 


OUTLOOK FOR THE 55,000 IN 
“INSTRUMENT SHORTAGE” AREAS 


So far as the “telephone instrument shortage” areas are 
concerned, we hope the production and allocation of 
new instruments, recently authorized by the War Pro- 
duction Board, will enable us to begin reaching the 55,000 
at a substantial rate sometime next spring—and that we 
will be able to install service for a large part of this group 
by late summer or fall. 

Those who have been waiting longest will get service 
first, and the rule of “proper turn” will be followed 
throughout the list. 


OUTLOOK FOR THE 135,000 IN 
“SWITCHBOARD SHORTAGE” AREAS 


In the “switchboard shortage” areas the delay will be 
unavoidably longer. 

First, broad-scale production of switchboard and other 
central office equipment to fill civilian needs has not yet 
been authorized; and when it is, the manufacture will 
require months. 

Second, unlike products that are ready for use when 
they leave the assembly line, new switchboard equipment 
cannot be put into service immediately. It must be fitted 


Roosevelt typified faith in democ- |} 
mayd ee = — oper pre im |gency, whether a bankrupt coun- 
e hearts of millions of p : ; ; 
all nations. He said that the Pres-| try in 1933, a war = 1941, or a bliz- 
ident likewise remained the symbol |Zard in Greater New York!” he 

of democracy to “those who hate/exclaimed. 
freedom.” | Frankly conceding that “the 

“That is why the forces of racial|vote will be close in New York! 
and religious intolerance, the ex-|State,” Mr. Wallace said that the 
ponents of bigotry and prejudice, 
bear toward our President a ven- 
omous and undying hatred,” he 
charged. 

Senator Truman said that Gov- 
ernor Dewey, on the other hand, 
“has tried to beguile us with double 
talk.” He said that Mr. Dewey 
was in favor of legislation against 
lynching, “but conveniently omits} 
to say whether it shall be State or 
Federal legislation”; that he op- 
poses the poll tax, but proposes 
that “its destruction shall be de- 
layed by the cumbersome and stall- 
ing device of a _ constitutional 
amendment.” 


and heard through WJZ in this 
city. 

Later in the evening James W. 
Gerard, former Ambassador to 
Germany, and Fannie Hurst, au- 
thor, spoke over WOR in behalf 


into existing central office equipment before it can be 
used to connect new telephones with those already in 
service. This process will require still more months. 

For these reasons the demand for home telephone service 
may take longer to fill than the demand for many manufac- 
tured products, as the country changes from a war to a 
peace footing. 

But families waiting for telephones may feel sure that, 
once restrictions are lifted on the manufacture of telephone 
service equipment, production and installation will proceed 
with all. possible speed. 

We and the rest of the Bell System are planning to 
invest many millions of dollars to the end that post-war 
telephone service will be still more efficient, and of still 
greater usefulness to more families, than ever before. 


|men who do not understand that,/every anti-Semite “is howling his 


by the force of our arms, America 
has changed the history of the 
world; men who cannot see that, 
in changing world history, we have| job Insurance Needed for Post- 
acquired new responsibilities, and War Prosperity, He Says of Senator Wagner's campaign for 
‘ ‘i€ |have created a need for new politi- , }re-election. 

result of the election would be a8! cal leadership,” he said. Expanding Social Security for | ua 

PULL HAIR 


i 
jimportant to the world as a big “Tt am sick of the kind of party | the nation to include returning war| 1 NT 


jnaval battle or the crumbling of smathie tee aie veterans “will mean the difference 
May cause fatal infection 


| he Hitler West Wall.” He called nominate for} ‘ ' ; 
lupon those present to work hard|Senator of the United States a/| between prosperity and depression | 
|party errand boy like Thomas J. 
use KLIPETTE 
NEW INVENTION 


|iuring the remaining five days of after the war,” Senator Robert F. 
| he campaign because their efforts|Curran—a man who knows no Wagner declared last night in re- 
‘may determine the future of|more about international affairs|newing his pledge to extend the 
than this audience knows about 
You can cause serious infection 
asa result of pulling hair from 
nose. Use of scissors is also dan 


| America.” Wagner act, 
the Einstein theory. And what he 
gerous and impractical. There is 


WAGNER FOR VETERAN AID 





Mr. Wallace said that Governor The Senator declared that at the 

Dewey, in the event that he won,|thinks he knows is chiefly isola-|last session of Congress he had 

would face the problem of “how to/|tionist doctrine.” fought to double the $100 mus- 

reward the isolationists after they| Mr. Dubinsky said that not even|tering-out pay for veterans, to 

|have voted for him, to make the|Governor Dewey or Mr. Bricker) give them unemployment insurance 
farmers happy after prices have|dared to declare that they would) until they found jobs, to grant edu- 

'gone down, to employ labor after|attempt to destmoy the New Deal| cational aid to all veterans regard-|no better way to remove hair 
ithe post-war boom has burst.” legislation, but that “we believe/less of age and to base assistance|from nose and ears than with 
“Who is better qualified to lead! “Roosevelt has planned his way/|that the New Deal is much safer in|to veterans on the number of de-|KLIPETTE. Smooth, gentle, safe 
us in paths of faith and under-/successfully through two World| the hands of its parents.” He said} pendants. and efficient. Rounded points 
standing than Franklin Roose-|Warg” Mr. Wallace said. “He that the trade union movement had “The Republicans in the Sen- —™ ) cannot cut or orick skin 
velt?” Senator Truman demanded. |knows the inflationary and defla-|never given the Democratic Ad-)ate,” he charged, “succeeded in de- SO SIMPLE Just turn 
“His humanity knows neither Jew tionary problems which plague all|ministration “a blank check of|feating these Social Security pro- the end. Surplus hair 
nor gentile, Catholic nor Protes-/war periods. Above all, Roosevelt|allegiance” but that President/visions for veterans, because they | comes out easily and 
tant, black man nor white man—/|is experienced enough to know the|Roosevelt “stood head and shoul-| lined up against them by the over- gently. Never pulls. 
ders above his party in liberalism? Guaranteed to Sat $9 Shade foom 

isfy or Money Back fine Surgical Steel. 

08S SESS FESS TESST CSHS SS SSSESESESSES EH SESS SSEEEEEe 

HOLLIS CO. 1) Commerce St. Newark 2 NJ. Dept. 38A 

Enclosed is $1.00 for KLIPETTE. If not entirely satis 

fied. | may return it and my $1.00 will be refunded 





but only his fellow-men.” jbeat of the-heart of humanity.” whelming majority of twenty-six 
Mr. Alfange charged _ that! Republicans against and only three 


“Thomas E. Dewey has been on|Republicans for. The Republican 
every side of every issue that now} leadership is still the relentless and 
confronts the American people.”|dangerous enemy of Social Se- 
He added that every reactionary,|curity.” 

every isolationist, every Britain-| The Senator’s talk was carried 
hater, every Russia-baiter andiin the State by the Blue Network 


NEW YORK TELEPHONE COMPANY 


Vice President Wallace declared; Mr. Davenport declared that he 
that ten days ago the biggest Re-|was a registered Republican who 
publican campaign issue was ex-| was “sick of the hollow men, the 
ploded in this city “by a blizzard|obsolete issues, the distortions, the 
and a lot of rain.” jbackward glances, the hate—espe- 

“What a joy it is to have a|cially the hate.” 
leader that can rise to any emer-' “I am sick of the candidacy of 





N00 
7 





UPTO LOCAL BOARDS 


City Elections Officials Vote to 
Leave Questions of Validity 
to Inspectors at Polls 


the State—Borough 


By unanimous vote, the Board of 
Elections for this city decided yes- 
terday to leave all questions as to 
the validity of war ballots to the) 
decision of local boards in each 
election district. At least 6,600 
ballots may be subject to question 
because of mutilation, failure of 

, y a. re ° f 
gphnend - — oe ene een |New York City would be more than 
to have it witnessed properly or 
otherwise to comply with the strict |800,000, but warned that a shift of 
letter of the law. 5 per cent or 150,000 voters to 

Shortly after this decision was|Governor Dewey .is possible before 
announced, Thomas L. J. Curcoran, | next Tuesday. 
tees egg Ee naan Such a shift, it was emphasized, 
ter announcing that Democratic|™ight give the Republican stand- 
watchers and challengers in New/ard bearer the State, since it would 
York County had been instructed|increase Mr. Dewey’s vote in the 
not to raise any technical objec-|city at the same time that it was 
tion, regardless of the candidate|reducing the President’s margin. 
for whom a war ballot is cast. The| [he Governor, according to the CIO 
letter was addressed to the law/estimate, will receive a plurality of 
committee chairmen of other par-|more than 500,000 up-State. 
ties operating in New York 
County, and suggested that they|that the forecast is based on “a 
take similar action careful survey of the potential vote 

Mr. Corcoran’s letter did not/on Nov ’ which included “sam- 
presume to advise the Democratic! plings in our unions and in a num 
members of local election boards! ber of Assembly districts, election 
how they should vote if any soldier! district by election district, by in- 
ballots were challehged 3ut if/come level groups, by nationali- 
they follow his advice to Demo-' ties.” 
cratic watchers and challengers, The shift from. Roosevelt to 
all challenges would be overruled.| Dewey that may change the whole 
Under the election law a majority|outlook, the report explained, “is 
vote in a local election board is| possible if we permit to go 
necessary to uphold a challenge.) challenged the filth, confusion and 
Each local board is composed of/dissension being sown by the 
two Democrats and two Repub-/G.0.P. machine in New York City. 


litical situation made by _ the 
Greater N@éw York Council of the 
iCongress of Industrial Organiza- 
jtions for the guidance of its union 


President Roosevelt’s majority in 


leaders yesterday estimated that} 


un-| 


licans. 
Election Board’s Statement 


The decision of the Board of 
Elections to make each local board 
the judge of the validity of ballots 
cast in its district was announced 
in a formal statement, which said: 

“The Board of Elections desires 
to announce that under an opinion 
rendered by the Attorney General 
on Oct. 26, 1944, to wit: ‘The char- 
acter of proof required to sustain 
such objections is primarily a mat- 


ter for the consideration of the) 


local board of inspectors, and the 


Board of Elections has no juris-| 


diction in connection therewith. 


* * © The board of inspectors forth-| 


with shall proceed to determine 
such objection and a majority vote 


ts required to sustain the objec-| 


tion.’ 

“In accordance with this opin- 
fon, the commissioners of the 
Board of Elections unanimously 
agree that all ballots received by 
them that could be identified as 
to the voter, would be forwarded 
to the various borough offices of 
the board for transmittal to the 
election: inspectors in the respec- 
tive districts.” 

The decision was announced aft- 


er a conference of the four Com-| 


missioners of Elections and the 
following: A. David Benjamin, 
chairman of the Kings County Re- 
ublican law committee; William 
. O'Shea, chairman of the State 
Democratic law committee; Mr. 
Corcoran and John McGrath, 
chairman of the Kings County 
Democratic law committee. 


Goldstein Issues a Ruling 

ALBANY, Oct. 31 (4)—Attorney 
General N. L. Goldstein said today 
in an opinion that State war bal- 
lots, enclosed in Federal War Bal- 
lot envelopes, could not be legally 
counted. 

The opinion was prepared at the 
request of the War Ballot Com- 
mission, which, by a split vote, 
failed to decide whether Federal 
War Ballot envelopes should be 
sent to local election boards. 

The Attorney General's opinion 
said that “if perchance a State 
war ballot should be contained in 
one of the. Federal envelopes it 
could not be canvassed or count- 
ed,”’ because “the voter’s oath ap- 
pearing on the Federal envelope 
does not comply with the require- 
ments of the State Constitution 
and laws.” 


CHANCE : 


This loss is possible if we do not| 
| get out the maximum vote on} 


Nov. 7.” 

Differ From Party Figures 
Estimates of the _ relative 
|strength of the two candidates in 


the various boroughs arrived at in 
the CIO survey differ considerably 


from figures used by political ob-| 


servers in the two major parties. 
In some cases they indicate more 
strength for the President than 
most of his other backers claim 
and in others more strength for 
|Dewey than his managers antici- 
pate. 

Following are the CIO estimates 
of President Roosevelt's pluralities 
in the city: 

'The Bronx 
Brooklyn 310,000 
;Manhattan ala . 253,000 

Governor Dewey, it was esti- 
mated, will receive these plurali- 
ties 
Queens 
Richmond : 12,300 

These figures would give the 
President a net city plurality of 
790,700 on the basis of the civilian 
vote. To them the CIO added an 
lestimate that he would receive a 
plurality of 54,600 in the soldier 
votes cast in the city on the sup- 
jposition that 60 per cent of the 
}votes would go to the President 
jand 40 per cent to Governor 
Dewey. Adding the soldier vote 
margin, the President would. have 
a net plurality 

45,300. 


Dewey Pluralities Higher 


85.000 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


WAR BALLOT FLAWS 800,000 Roosevelt Lead in City 


Estimated in CIO Council Survey’ PUT IN 3 COUNTIES 


Labor Group Warns That Shift of 5 Per Cent party OPrE Vote 
in the Voting Might Give Governor Dewey 


Strengths Predicted 


By LEO EGAN 
A confidential survey of the po-|New York City and State. In this} 


lelection its activities have out- 
stripped those of a lagging and un- 
jresponsive Democratic party ma- 
| chine.” 

It was labor, the survey said, 
that won the first two major bat- 
jtles of the campaign: the battle 
|tor the soldier vote and the battle 
fon a big registration. 

“Roosevelt's victory, whatever 
wil count on line C [the ALP line] 





will be the ALP’s in New York 
State and City more than that of 
any other party or group,” the 
survey said. “That great service 
to the country, inspired and led by 
[Sidney] Hillman [chairman of 
the Political Action Committee], 
will give the ALP the opportunity 
to become the second if not the 
major party in New York City 


An introductory note explains| within the next few years. [David] 


Dubinsky’s Liberal party, its fac- 
| tional and divisive job done, should 
find it discreet to evaporate at 9 
|P. M. on Nov. 7.” 


Certain Groups “Befuddled” 


Discussing factors that have in- 
fluenced voters in the campaign, 
the survey said that the Dewey- 
|Bricker Republican group through 
juse of “Hitlerlike propaganda 
techniques” has succeeded in tem- 
|Porarily “befuddling” a certain 
|group of voters, directing their at- 
|tention particularly to about 300,- 
| 000. : 

Reporting on the results of 
| samplings within particular 
|groups, the CIO survey added: 
“At least 77.1 per cent of all CIO 
|members, including new workers 
in war industries, will vote for 
|Roosevelt. In the older unions the 
vote runs a8 high as 87 and 92 per 
cent. In war industries, where 
|there has been a large influx of 
|hitherto unorganized workers, the 
| vote runs in some instances as low 
as 58 per cent but averages 71.8 
per cent. In some of these unions 
the percentage for Roosevelt has 
|fluctuated in the last four weeks. 
These fluctuations were due main- 
|ly to two factors: 

“1. The composition of the 
union membership. A few weeks 
‘ago fluctuation was highest in 
| Such unions as shipyard and elec- 
jtrical. In these unions there are 
/many young women, German, Ital- 
ian and Irish workers, who are 
new to the trade-union movement. 
Many of them live in areas in 
|which the Republicans have been 
concentrating. 
| “2. An underestimation by the 
| leaders of some of these unions of 
|their members’ pro-F. D, R. feel- 
|ing’s led them to believe that it was 
ibest to bypass the political as- 
|pects of trade-union problems. 
|Subsequent measures proved that 
|their fears were unwarranted.” 


— 








POLITICAL ADVERTISEMENT 


REPUBLICAN HOPES 


Liquor Sellers Warned 
On Election Day Closing 


John F. O'Connell, chairman 
of the State Liquor Authority, 
yesterday called to the atten- 
tion of all licensees the provi- 
sions of the Alcohol Beverage 
Control Law that. prohibit the 
sale of alcoholic beverages 
while the polls are open on elec- 
tion day and said that in event 
of a violation proceedings to re- 
voke the license of the offender 
would be instituted. 

Package stores licensed for 
the sale of liquor or wine for 
off-premises consumption are re- 
quired by law to remain closed 
from 6 A. M. to 9 P. M., while 
the polls are open. Al! retail 
establishments that are licensed 
to sell liquor, wine, beer or cider 
for consumption on the prem- 
ises may remain open, but are 
prohibited from selling any alco- 
holic beverages during these 
hours. Grocery stores and per- 
sons licensed to sell beer at re- 
tail for off-premises consump- 
tion are prohibited from selling 
beer while the polis are open in 
those counties where the Alco- 
hol Beverage Control Board has 
restricted its sale on election 
day. 


in Nassau, 
Suffolk and Westchester 
Will Offset City Result 





By JAMES A. HAGERTY 
the Republicans 
York State 


for 
ot 


Hope of 


carrying New 
| Governor Dewey is based largely 
“ expectation of large plural- 


ities for him in the three suburban 


Suffolk and 


counties of Nassau, | 


Westchester. 

Republican leaders these 
three counties—J. Russel Sprague 
of Nassau, W. Kingsland Macy of 
Suffolk and Livingston Platt of 
Westchester—confidently expect 
that the three together will return 
a minimum plurality of 200,000 for 
the Governor, 80,000 each in Nas- 
sau and Westchester and 40,000 
in Suffolk, and hope that this 
plurality may be as high as 225,000 
to 240,000, 

From the Republican viewpoint, 
such a result would offset or nearly 
offset the expected plurality for 
President Roosevelt in the Bronx. 


: | $981,764 IS SPENT 
ally certain toe gia onttentiui| BY REPUBLICANS HERE 


|Pluralities for the Republican na-| 
|tional ticket, the party leaders} WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 WP)—| 
| believe the rest of the State with|The United Republican Finance 
|Queens and Richmond added will|Committee for Metropolitan New| 
{be able to overcome the large! York received $1,263,476 and spent) 
| Roosevelt pluralities expected in| $981,764 through Oct. 26, a state-| 
| Brooklyn and Manhattan. ment on file with the House clerk | 
In 1940 the late Wendell 


L.|showed today. 
| Willkie carried the three counties} John Foster Dulles, foreign af-| 
by 173,129—Nassau by 70,501, Suf-| 
folk by 29,859 and Westchester by! 
72,769. 


fairs adviser to Governor Dewey, 
Democratic leaders hope to hold 


of 


contributed $1,600 and his wife 
$1,000. Other donors’ included 
George Whitney, $1,500; former} 
Gov. Nathan L. Miller, $1,000; Eli- 


the Dewey pluralities to th® 1940 
hu Root Jr., $1,000; and Bruce 


figures, but concede privately that 
titey may reach the 200,000 mark.| Barton, $200. 

John §S. Thorp, Nassau County Contributions of $13,262 and ex- 
Democratic chairman, estimates|Ppenditures of $4,212 between Sept. 
that the Dewey plurality in that|19 and Oct. 25 were reported by 
county will not be more than 70,-|the Democrats for Dewey, a Balti- 
000, which is about what Mr. Will-|™more organization which identified 
kie received in 1940. Reports to|itself as an affiliate of the anti- 
Democratic State headquarters in-|New Deal American Democratic 
dicate that Governor Dewey may| National Committee. 


carry Westchester by 75,00 The Democratic Congressional 
Suffolk by 35,000. ts and) Campaign Committee reported to- 


There has been some influx of day that from Aug. 18 to Oct, 27 
war workers in each of the three/it received contributions S $61,- 
counties, but the Republicans are|!14.90 and expended $96,8 .. ; 
so much better organized there| The Democratic Congressiona 
than the Democrats that no sub- Ganges Co = 
stantial decrease from the 1940|4#Y that from Aug. . 


i i it received contributions of $61,- 
ee by the Roose-| 144 90 and expended $56,800. 


With former up-State Republi- sg: E A 
can strongholds like Monroe and|Voiding of Nominations Upheld 
Onondaga Counties, which contain In an unanimous decision the 
the industrial cities of Rochester| Appellate Division of the Supreme 
and Syracuse, less strongly Repub-|Court affirmed yesterday a ruling 
lican than they once were, the|that voided the nominations of 
three suburban counties have be-/three Liberal party local candi- 
come the centers of Republican|dates in Queens. The lower court 
strength in the State. had held their nominating petitions 

The influence of the CIO Politi-|lacked sufficient valid signatures. 
cal Action Committee and the|Those affected are Louis Walters, 
American Labor party is much less|candidate for Congress in the 
than in other counties of com-)|Fourth district; Harry Berlin, can- 
parable population; in fact, left-|didate for the State Senate in the 
wing control of the Labor party is|Fifth district, and James J. 
said to be a liability to President|O’Meara, candidate for the Assem- 
Roosevelt in these three counties. bly in the Twelfth district. 














‘Some volunteers were appointed by 


GOLDSTEIN PRESSES 
POLL FRAUD CASES 


Continued From Page 1 


until he had completed his investi-| 
gation. 

Dr. Wade explained that there) 
were 365 literacy test centers in 
operation this year, to which teach- 
ers were assigned as supervisors. 


the assistant superintendents of, 
schools after it became evident that 
additional. help was needed, he 
said. Hig information, he added, 
was that the volunteers went to} 
centers other than those to which} 
they had been assigned and that 
this was responsible for some con- 
fusion. 

Mayor La Guardia said he ex-) 
pected to have a report from Dr. 
Wade tomorrow. As he understood 
it the question involved is whether 
those who obtained literacy certifi- 
cates are, in fact, literate, the 
Mayor explained, 

Among those who charged yes- 
terday that Mr. Herlands and Mr. 
Goldstein were employing the pow- 
er of the Attorney General’s office 
in an attempt to keep naturalized 
citizens from the polls were Hy- 
man Blumberg, State Secretary of 
the American Labor party; Eugene 
P. Connolly, secretary of the New 
York County Committee of the! 
ALP, and Rose V. Russell, legisia-| 
tive representative of the Teachers) 
Union. 

“Mr. Herlands’ attempt to indict 
the 400,000 voters of the American} 
Labor Party for alleged fraud on} 
literacy tests is a flagrant political | 
abuse of the powers and preroga-| 
tives of his public office,’ Mr. 
Blumberg charged. 

Miss Russell in a telegram to 
Dr. Wade offered the full coopera- 
tion of the Teachers Union to the 
inquiry but added: “We believe 
that these charges are a flagrantly 
partisan action to prejudice and 
intimidate both teachers and first 
voters.” Mr. Connolly said that 
many thousands of citizens seek- 
ing to take the literacy test were 
intimidated into leaving without 
taking it. 


Mails Bar Booklet on Hillman 

PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 31 ()— 
Gerald J. McDermody, assistant 
superintendent of mails at the} 
Philadelphia postoffice, said today 
that the booklet “Clear Every- 
thing With Sidney” has been ruled 
‘unmailable” by the Postoffice De- 
partment. Vincent M. Miles, the 
department's solicitor in Washing- 
ton, told him by telegram, Mr. Mc- 
Dermody said, that the ruling was 
made because the booklet was 
termed “libelous” and contained 
“indecent matter.” 











Not Acting for Printing Trades 

THE NEW YORK TIMES yester- 
day listed among 250 labor leaders 
backing Governor Dewey for Presi- 
dent Vincent J. Ferris as repre- 
senting the printing trades in New 
York City. Richard Wright, secre- 
tary of the New York Allied 
Printing Trades Council, informed 
THE TIMES that Mr. Ferris did not 
represent the printing trades and 
that in supporting Governor Dewey 
he was acting as an individual. 








in the city of| 


| The CIO estimate of the Roose-| 
velt margin in the Bronx is about} 


100,000 better than 
years ago, the Brookiyn figure is 
off about 38,000 from the actual 
Roosevelt margin of 1940 and the 


it was four) 


Manhattan forecast would indicate | 


that the President will better his| 
The} 


Dewey plurality figures used for)| 


1940 record by about 68,000. 


Queens and Richmond are consid- 
erably higher than most Republi- 
can estimates and higher than 1940 
pluralities of Wendell L. Willkie. 
“Labor is carrying the ball for 
Roosevelt in New York City,” the 
survey noted. “Through PAC [the 
Political Action Committee] and 
the ALP which represents 


emerged in this election as the 
major progressive political force in 


* 


Today on 56 war fronts all over the world some Americans 


will die fighting . . . And tomorrow . 


- - and every day till 


victory . . . more Americans will die. 
If anybody should ask you if, by your own personal effort, you 


would shorten the war by so much as a minute, your answer 


would be obvious! 


Well, here's your chance: 
The 6th War Loan Drive opens Nov. 20. Between then and 
Dec. 16 the Treasury asks America to subscribe $14,000,000,000 


in War Bonds. 
The Treasury needs men and 


women, especially if they have 


relatives or close friends in the Armed Services, to enroll as 
authorized Voluateer U. S. Treasury Representatives, to help 
sell War Bonds during the 6th War Loan, in the Blue Star 


Brigade! 


If you have tree time—or if you can make some of your time 


PAC, | 
and many AFL [American Feder-| 
ation of Labor] unions, labor has| 


STATEMENT OF 


POLITICAL ADVERTISEMENT 


A REPUBLICAN FOR ROOSEVELT 


| have always been an independent voter, voting for men and issues in each campaign. However, 
| have almost consistently registered with the Republican Party and have followed its leadership and 


principles. 


The 1944 Election is a crucial one in the history of our country and the proper selection of a man 
who will have to complete the job of winning the war and maintain America’s prestige in the post-war 
period of rehabilitation is of vital concern to every American. The man we elect must be one who has 
been tested; must be one who has the respect and admiration of the leaders of the world; must be one 
who has the vision to see America play its role for permanent peace and security to the people of the 


world. 


It is for that reason that | have come to the conclusion that Franklin Delano Roosevelt is absolutely 


essential to our country in the position of President. 


In New York State, citizens may vote for Franklin Delano Roosevelt on any one of three lines, Dem- 
ocratic Party line, the American Labor Party line and the Liberal Party line. The important thing is to 
elect Roosevelt by the sum total of the votes cast on all these lines. However, | feel a keen admiration 
for the work done by the organized labor movement and feel that the violent attacks which have been 


hurled against it were 


not only unsportsmanlike, but also un-American. 


| 
| 





Because of the admiration | have for the organ ized labor movement in New York State, | plan to 
cast my vote for Franklin Delano Roosevelt on the American Labor Party line on November 7th. 


October 28, 1944 


Excerpt from Who’s Who in America, 1944-1945 


William Jay Schieffelin 





Rogers Unaware Paper 


17 


I 
4 


ROOSEVELT VISITS HULL 


Urged Election of Dewey | says Secretary, Who Is in Hos 


Former Representative Will | 
Rogers Jr. of California, now 
fighting as a second lieutenant 
in Holland, got word through to 
President. Roosevelt last night 
that his paper, The Beverley 
Hills Citizen, had made its en- 
dorsement of Governor Dewey 
“absolutely without my knowl- 
edge or consent.” 

“To attribute any such en- 
dorsement to me is utterly fan- 
tastic and absurd,” wired the 
son of the late humorist who had 
been a Democratic member of 
Congress before entering the 
Army. He said he had been 
“astounded to hear that my 
newspaper back in the States 
printed an editorial endorsing 
Dewey.” 

The text of Lieutenant Rogers’ 


pital, Looks Awfully Wei/ 


Special to Tus New Youu Tineas 
WASHINGTON 
dent Roosevelt called on Secretary 
Hull at the Naval Medica! Center. 
Bethesda, Md 
later reported 
that h 
looking awfu 
pleased at his 
Roosevelt added. 
The Secretary 
physical check-up 
'a half hour about various t 
including foreign affairs an 
tics, Mr. Roosevelt said 
Asked how soon Mr. H 
|leave the hospital, the 
|replied that he had 
|doctors, and added 
some people 
lout that medical 


Uect 


this afternoor 


st } 


ence e had 


i 


A 
Preside 


not asked * 


message was made public by | 
Robert E. Hannegan, Democratic 


National Chairman, to whom it 
had been transmitted by Mrs. 
Rogers. The lieutenant had asked 
that the message go “to my 
friend President Roosevelt.” 

{_{{{_=========_—_—_—_—~ 


Mrs. Lehman for Roosevelt 

Mrs. Herbert L. Lehman, wife of 
New York’s former Governor who 
now heads the United Nations Re- 
lief and Rehabilitation Administra- 
tion, declared last night in a talk 
broadcast to a State-wide audience 
over the Columbia 
System that she favored the 
election of President Roosevelt 


OPEN EVERY THU 


re- 


Broadcasting |} 


MONTREAL 


PHONE 
MUrray Hill 65515 


COLCNIAL AIRLINES 


a 
AY TO 9 P.M 


A 


RSD 


HEARNS , 
4 


Now ... Many Famous Brands Available 
« . . Wide Selection Of Gift Packages 


8 YEAR OLD OVERHOLT 
BOTTLED IN BOND 


A3 


4/5 Quart 


A great American brand 
from a great American 
distiller...“Old Overholt” 
is a bottled in bond 
straight rye whiskey, 2% 
years old. 100 Proof, 
Limit & bottles to a cus 
tomer. 


“Three Vines,” a Spanish 
4.83 
drink. 86 Proof. 
Case, 58.68 
The distinctive flavor and bouquet 
A fine-flavored gin distilled in the of this fine product wil! make your 
U.S. A. from 100% Grain Neutral 


PEDRO DOMECQ’S 
import of superior qual- 
ity. Sip it straight or in 
4&3 Quart 
Milshire Distilled Boca Chica | 
London Dry Gin 
next Rum Drink @ truly delicious 
Spirits. 90 Proof. 3-34 one. 86 proof. .73 
Case 40.08 450: 


FINE IMPORTED 
your favorite brandy 
Puerto Rican Rum 
One of America’s Best! 
Cave 45.48 «ss 


World-Famous “Waldorf Astoria” Cuban Rum 
White or Gold Lebel Proot. CASE 47.88 
Royal Brut imported White Sparkling Wine 
A Portuguese wine of 1934 Vintage 
Bellows Special Reserve Blended Whiskey 

66 2/3% Grain Neutral rits. 86.8 Proof 

P. M. Deluxe Blend of Straight Whiskies 

A fine product by National Distillers. 86.8 Proof 
Imported Forrester 1912 Port Wine. CASE 3/08 
Duff Gordon “Pinta” Sherry (Pale Dry) CAS 


Seagram's 7 Crown Blended Whiskey 
65% Grain Neutral Spirits. 86.8 Proof 


PARK & TILFORD 


Reserve Blended 


WHISKEY 


3.99 
3.99 
3.58 
3.89 


88 


< 
>t 


William Jay Schieffelin, Chairman Emeritus of the Citizens Union of the City 
of New York; Civil Service Commissioner, 1896; Adjutant, 12th N. ¥. Infantry, 
Spanish-American War, 1898; President, Schieffelin & Co., 1906-23; President of 
1910; Chairman, American 


free-— during the next six weeks, JOIN THE BLUE STAR 
BRIGADE! Go to your local War Finance Committee Office 
today, or mail in the coupon below for information on how 
you can become a Volunteer U. S. Treasury Representative 
during the 6th War Loen. 


Neal 


YOUR SERVICE RIBBON 


Mail the coupom at right for 
your copy of “Let's Finish the 
Job.” It explains how you can 
earn the Blue Star Service Rib- 
bom Pin authorized as am ex- 
clasively civilian decoration 
and awarded to all officers of 
the Biue Star Brigade. 


years old) and 70% cane 
product neutral spirits. 86.8 
proof. Case $48. ~ 


30% straight whiskey (5% g { 


seven years old and 25% four 
435 Qt. 


the National Association of Wholesale Druggists, 
Friends of Czecho-Slovakia; Vice-President of the American Bible Society; Trustee 


WAR FINANCE COMMITTEE, 
1270 Sixth Avenue, 

New York 20, N, Y. 

Gentlemen: 

Please send me a copy of “Let's 
Finish the Job", the Blue Stor 
Brigade booklet which will tell me 
how to enroll as a Volunteer U. S$, 
Treasury Representative during 
the éth War Loan. 


NAME + eves eewewo cs cs coeee 
ADDRESS ... 2.20. sscccccece 


of the Hampton Institute and the Tuskegee Institute; Colonel of the Sth New 


PARK « THLPOR? 


York Infantry, 1918; and President of the Huguenot Society. 
RESERVE) 


RE-ELECT ROOSEVELT — VOTE ROW C ON ELECTION DAY cu 


24 oz. 





America’s Chateau d'Yquem 
CHATEAU WENTE jaiiuxo 
SAUTERNE sf 
A delightful sweet sauterne a *% 
produced and bottled in A \ 
California. Also Dry Sauterne. a ‘i 
Case 16.68 
MAIL AND PHONE ORDERS FILLED 
on 2 Fifth size bottles, their equivalent or larger. 
For shipments in New York State, beyond our regular liquor delivery area, 
ane “> he a op © grow of oy 4 we will ship express collect, We reserve the right to limit quantities. 
New or uainess Organiaationa to the 
Hearn Dept. Stores, inc., 74-Sth Ave. (14th St.) GR. 55-5550 


War Finance Committee for New York 





18 L+ 
| 


GOP PROGRAM BEST, | 
CURRAN CONTENDS 


Senate Candidate Says Thou- 
sands of Democrats Back 
Dewey to End Confusion 


By JAMES P. McCAFFREY 


Special to Tur New York Times 
BUFFALO, Oct. 31—Thomas J.} 
Curran, Republican candidate “for| 
the United States Senate, sum-| 
marized his reasons tonight as to! 
why President Roosevelt should| 
not be considered an indispensable | 
man and the New Deal adminis- | 
be defeated oo 


tration should 


Tuesday 

Sharing the platform here with| 
Governor Dewey, the Secretary of} 
State quoted from the Republican| 
Presidential candidate's campaign | 
speeches and the party’s conven-| 
tion platform as proof that the/ 
Republican party had a better pro-} 
gram on domestic issues as well) 
as on foreign issues. 

The candidate declared _ that} 
thousands of Democrats would join! 
the ranks of Republicans as a pro- 
test against the “hit-and-miss”’ 
policies of the present national Ad- 
ministration He again demanded 
that Mr. Roosevelt returned to 
private life because the fourth 
term, he said, was a threat to the 
American way of life 

“The fourth term is being advo- 
cated by the Communists, and 
what is left of the Democratic 
party, by a vast army of bureau-| 
crats whose future depends upon} 
it, and by a small group of big-city | 
bosses who fear that their power} 
would end when Roosevelt leaves | 
Washington,” Mr. Curran said. | 

Mr. Curran questioned the right) 
of the President’s supporters to 
describe Mr. Roosevelt as “a won- 
derful President in peacetime.” He} 
said the President wrecked busi-| 
ness in the early days of his ad- 
ministration and then confused) 
labor so much that labor’s ranks) 
were completely divided. 

“The President threw away vast 
sums of money after promising 
economy,” Mr. Curran said. “He 
played at government as whimsi-| 
cally as a well-mannered Nero. He} 
ran things by ear. He started 
projects and then forgot them. He 
set one executive to fight another} 
executive. He made light of the! 
most serious matters.” 

Mr. Curran, who is opposing} 
Senator Robert F. Wagner, de-| 
clared the Republican platform was} 
to the point when it pledged to} 
work for an organization to pre-| 
serve peace even if necessary to use| 
force. Governor Dewey, he said,| 
had amplified this convention plank 
and had done it thoroughly. 

“This war is not being won by 
the New Deal,” Mr. Curran said. 
“It is being won by industry and| 
labor and ordinary citizens—and in| 
some ways it is being won in spite| 
of the obstacles raised by the na-| 
tional administration. The peace 
will be won by the same people.” 





be 


Charlestonians Sponsor Dewey 


Following is the text of Gov- 


ernor Dewey's Buffalo address as 
lrecorded and transcribed by THE 
' NEW 


YORK TIMES: 


Chairman, Senator 
Fellow-Americans 

I want to ask you to 
look ahe2ad into our future as a 
nation Join me in looking at 
what country will face the 
day victory over our ene- 
mies 

But first, let me give you right 
now two solemn assurances 
prompted by the speeches of my 
opponent last Friday and Satur- 
day nights. 

Your next 
use his office 


Mr Tom 
Curran, 


Tonight 


oul 
after 


President will never 
to claim personal 
or political profit from the 
achievements of the American 
people or from the sacrifices of 
their sons and daughters 

Your next President will never 
make you a promise that he does 
not intend with all his heart and 
soul to keep. 

And let me add that except for 
the pledges I have made publicly 
to the American people, your next 
President will take office an Jan 
20, 1945, without a promise, ex- 
pressed or implied, to a living 
soul, 

There is no One Thousand Club 
in my party. I haven’t offered 
the Government of the United 
States for sale at a thousand dol- 
lars to any man and I never will 
to anyone at any price Your 
next Administration will take of 
fice honeatly, without secret 

special privilege to 
section or group of 


promises o1 
any 
Americans. 

Now, put your minds ahead with 
me, if you will, into these peace- 
time years ahead, these years 
which by the courage of our fight- 
ing nen and with the help of Al- 
mighty God are now being 
brought closer every day. 

Eleven million men and women 
will be coming home from this 
war eager for more education, 
for jobs, for a chance to start a 
business and get ahead. Twenty 
million war workers will want 
peacetime jobs and opportunity. 

Last Saturday night my oppo- 
nent, once again, promised jobs 
for every American when peace- 
time comes. But his own peace- 
time record is that at the end of 
eight years the New Deal had 
spent fifty-eight billion dollars, 
it enjoyed more power than all 
previous Governments combined, 
and in March of 1940 there were 
still ten million Americans un- 
employed. 


Promise Called Worthless 


On the 
jobs is worthless. 
worthless, even though it 
peated again and again 
again. 

Having discovered from my 
Philadelphia speech, delivered two 
months ago, the need for a mil 
lion new homes a year, my oppo- 
nent now promises that. The 
act is that for years we should 
have been building a _ million 
homes a year just to get back up 
to the standards of 1930. But un 
der the New Deal we got an aver- 
age of only 380,000 new homes a 
year. 

On the record, then, that prom- 
ise, too, is no good even though 
it is repeated again and again and 
again. 

My opponent now promises to 
free the American’ working man 


class 


record his promise of 
It will still be 
re- 
and 


1s 








Text of Gov 


countants, 


and woman from the strangling 
bureaucracy he himself has cre- 
ated. When a man promises in 
trying to win an election that he 
will reverse the course of every- 
thing he has done for twelve 
years, then that promise, too, on 
the record, is no good even 
though it’s repeated again and 
again and again. 

My opponent promises the farm- 
ers good prices after the war. But 
the farmer knows that in all the 
peacetime years of the New Deal 


CHARLESTON, S. C., Oct 31 
(*?)—The Charleston Evening Post 
said today that a group of profes- 
sional business men and women of 
this city were sponsoring the cam- 
paign speech of Governor Dewey | 
over a coast-to-coast NBC radio 
network tomorrow night from 
Boston. The paper said the cost of 
the broadcast over about 100 sta- 
tions had been paid for by sub-/ 
scriptions here, ranging from $1 to| 
$500. . 


| not so state, it appeared to be an 
menu and mashed potatoes a la} 


DEWEY RIDIGULES sores 
ROOSEVELT PLEDGE),,2», i,m aan a 


“And yet, my opponent has the| 
jtemerity to go on the radio and 
say: ‘This Administration has been | 
mindful from its earliest days, and 
will continue to be mindful, of the 
problems of small business.’ 

“In the light of the record, that 
promise, too, is worthless, and will 
remain so, even though it is re- 
peated again and again and again. 


Continued From Page 1 


Dewey in Utica last Saturday, was 
that “your next President will 
never use his office to claim per- 
sonal or political profit from the 
achievements of the American peo- 
ple, or from the sacrifices of their 
sons and daughters.” This was|My opponent has read our platform 
presumed to be a retort to Mr./and is now saying ‘me too.’ Even 
Roosevelt's recital of the military|the New Deal knows it’s time for 
and naval victories now coming to|a change. 
a head. | “No, we cannot live on promises; 
The second pledge Mr. Dewey|we must have performance this 
made was that “your next Presi-|time—before it’s too late,” the Gov- 
dent will never make you a prom-|ernor continued. “As we keep our | 
ise that he does not intend, with all|minds on these peacetime years| 
his heart and soul, to keep.” ahead, let us remember one thing: | 
He then took up a series of what|my opponent has offered no pro-| 
he called “worthless promises”|gram for peacetime years ahead| 
made by Mr. Roosevelt. except the same on which he failed 
Anent Mr. Roosevelt's pledge of|for eight straight years of peace 
60,000,000 peacetime jobs, Mr.|from 1933 to 1940.” 
Dewey cited the theme of his own Answering Mr. Roosevelt on an-| 
campaign, that there had been “a/other point, namely, his claim that | 
Roosevelt depression” in which|when he was Governor of New| 
$58,000,000,000 had been spent by| York he quoted figures correctly,| 
the Federal Government, and that|Mr. Dewey said that he did not} 
there were 10,000,000 persons idle}remember Mr. Roosevelt ever| 
until wartime production furnished | quoting figures on his Administra- | 
jobs. |tion as Governor of New York “for | 
“On the record,” Mr. Dewey said,|one very good reason.” | 
“this promise of jobs is worthless.| “In every Administration Mr. | 
It will still be worthless, even| Roosevelt has headed, he ended up 
though it is repeated again and| ‘in the red.’ No country can long 
again.” survive under any leader who only 
Taking up Mr. Roosevelt’s pledge| piles up a higher debt each year, 
of a housing program, the Gov-|not just in war but in peace.” 
ernor said that, while the nation} Mr. Dewey termed it “a shock-| 
needed 1,000,000 new homes a year,|ing thing that my opponent after| 
it had only got 380,000 a year|twelve years as President felt com- 
under Mr. Roosevelt. pelled to announce, as news, last| 
“That promise, too, is no good,” |Saturday night, that he believes in| 
said the Republican candidate. ithe enterprise system.” 
He then pictured Mr. Roosevelt} He declared too, that “my oppo- | 


as promising to 





of 


“free the Ameri-|nent has not indicated how he will | 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER I, 1944. 


he never got decent prices. Under 
the New Deal it took a war to get 
prices, just as it took a war to 
get jobs. On the record that 
promise, too, is worthless, even 
though it also is repeated again 
and again and again. 

My opponent now promises to 
be mindful of the problems of 
small business. The small busi- 
ness men of America will know 
how mueh faith they can put in 
that, and I should like to talk 
briefly tonight about the future 
of small business in our country. 

This is the field in which a 
large part of our white-collar 
workers earn their living. This 
is the field of the forgotten man 
and woman under the New Deal. 

Now, American business men 
know that the New Deal way of 
being mindful of their problems 
has been slowly to drown them 
with a rising flood of rules and 
regulations, questionnaires, re- 
ports and directives. 


Paper Work Declared Test 


It’s been bad enough for large 
business, but the big corporation 
at least has its lawyers, its ac- 
clerks and _ astatisti- 
cians. When it comes to small 
business the burden of Govern- 
ment paper work has too often 
meant. the difference between 
success or failure. 

Take the case of Capt. J. E. 
Shields, of Seattle, Wash., who 
in the Salt codfish business 
thirty-three years his boats 
gone out until last year, 

the War Labor Board 
failed even to pass on his wage 
contraets. So, last year his boats 
couldn’t go out at all. 

He reports that this year he 
finally got clearance, after going 
through twenty-four’ different 
Government agencies in order to 
carry on one small business, In 
addition to the Navy Department, 
the Interior Department, the 
Commerce Department, the Treas- 
ury Department, the Immigration 
Service and the Maritime Com- 
mission, a partial list of the agen- 
cies he had to deal with includes 
WLB, WMC, OPA, WSA, FCC, 
USES, WPB, ODT, SS, WFA and 
others 

Here’s another sample of what 
our smal! businessmen have had 
to contend with. The world 
trembles in the greatest war of 
the ages and bureaucracy puts 
out the following ruling which 
restaurants must understand and 
obey. Listen to it: 

‘‘Mashed potatoes offered a la 
carte for weekday lunches would 
be in the same class of food items 
as potatoes au gratin offered a la 
carte for weekday lunches, but 
would be in a different class than 
mashed potatoes offered a la carte 
for weekday dinners or Sunday 
lunches, * * *’’ 

Well, that’s the New Deal way 
of being mindful of the problems 
of small business, It’s the same 
from restaurants to beauty par- 
lors, from electrical shops to in- 
surance businesses, from every- 
thing a man can start to make a 
living in. And that’s why it’s 
time for a change 


i 
For 
have 
when 


Charges Campaign Pretense 


Yes, the New Deal pretends at 
election time to be the friend of 
small business. It pretends to be 
a friend of small business, but 
how has small business actually 
fared under this Administration. 

The record shows that in 1942 
and 1943, the most prosperous 
years we have had under the 
New Deal—because of the wat 
there was a net decline of five 
hundred thousand in the number 
American small businesses. 
That means that a net figure of 
five hundred thousand, a half a 
million, small businesses closed 
their doors and died in just these 
two past years. 

And yet my opponent has the 
temerity to go on the radio and 


The Campaign on Radio 
The following political broad- 
casts are scheduled for today: 


Democratic 
Russell WJZ, 6:15- 
6:30 P. M 

Dorothy Thompson—WOR, 8:15- 
8:30 P. M.; WMCA, 9:30-10 P. M. 

John Gunther, Orson Welles 
and Quentin Reynolds—WEAF, 
9-9:30 P. M 

Senator Harry §S 
WJZ, 10-10:30 P, M. 

Senator Robert F. Wagner, can- 
didate for re-election —-WMCA, 
10:15-10:30 P. M. 

Vice President Henry A. Wal- 
lace and Harold Ickes, Secretary 
of the Interior—WOR, 11 P. M.- 
12 midnight. (Record.) 


Republican 


Governor Dewey — Rebroadcast 
of last night’s speech at Buffaio 

WOR, 12:30-1 P. M. 

Gov. Walter Edge of New Jersey 
and H. Alexander Smith, candi- 
date for Senator from New Jer- 
sey—WJZ, 7:15-7:30 P. M. 

Governor Dewey, at Boston 
WEAF and WOR, 9$:30-10 P. M. 


Socialist 
Thomas — WJZ, 7: 


Davenport 


Truman — 


Norman 15- 


7:30 P. M. 


American Labor 
James V. King, candidate for 
Representative from Fourteenth 
District, Brooklyn — WJZ, 11:20- 
11:30 P. M. 


Liberal 
Dorothy Thackrey and T. O. 
Thackrey—WABC, 6:15-6:30 P. M. 
George Frankenthaler, Matthew 
M. Levy and Leo J. Rosett — 
WEAF, 11:15-11:30 P. M. 
Bipartisan 
“Keeping the Record Straight’”’ 
—Carl Sherman, Democrat; Capt. 
Grant Reynolds, Republican — 
WNYC, 9-9:30 P. M. 


can working man from the stran-|achieve, in post-’ar years, what | pledged themselves to a program 


gling bureaucracy he himself has}he so tragically failed to achieve | 


created,” and as promising the/in pre-war years.” 
farmers “good prices after the) 


\for lasting peace.” 


“We must not have—we cannot 


In summarizing his own Pro-|haye—four more years of stale- 


war.” Of the first Mr. Dewey said|gram, Mr. Dewey said that “vir-|mate and hostility between the 


a promise to reverse everything a|tually every element of our pro-| president 


and Congress,” Mr. 


man has done for twelve years ob-|gram is something the New Deal| Dewey declared. ‘‘We must restore 
viously “is no good,” and that the|has fought against, or neglected, |t the White House a willingness to 
farmer knows that “in all the|and cannot now, for election pur-| work out problems with the Con- 


peace-time years of the New Deal! poses, claim to favor.” 


he never got decent prices.” After reviewing his program, 


|gress as equals, in the American 
fashion, over the conference table; 


Mr. Dewey then took up the | and recalling the conflicts between|we must bring an end to govern- 
problem of small business, and pic-| Congress and the President, which| ment by abuse and smear.” 


tured its operators as choked by;he had stressed in other speeches, 
bureaucracy and burdened by the|Mr. Dewey continued: 

necessity of frequent and unneces-| 
sary reports to the Government. He Congress no longer trusts or ac- 
cited two examples—one of a cap-|cepts the leadership of my oppo- 
tain in the salt-codfish business|nent. It is generally agreed that 
who had to “skip” one year of|the House, and probably the Sen- 
business because the War Labor|ate, will be Republican next year. 
Board failed to pass on his wage|So, already Mr. Roosevelt has 
contracts, and then could get clear-| undertaken to insult the new lead- 
ance only by going through/ership. In his speech of last Fri- 
twenty-four different Government|day night he accused the men who 
agencies. The second example in-}will be the leaders of placing po- | 
volved a directive on mashed po-|litical advantage above devotion to 
tatoes, and while Mr. Dewey did'country, just because they publicly 


“We have seen that a New Deal) 


A lively crowd of 20,000 persons 


CHEST 
COLDS 


mmm = ACt promptly to 
relieve muscular soreness and tight- 
ness, fits of coughing in the night. 


Tonight, at bedtime, Vv! cKs 
a vu 


cub on time-tested 


say 

















jhall he was greeted by a roaring 
chant of “It’s time for a change,” 
iwhich ended only when he raised 
his hands for silence. 


| 





| 


| 


| Rochester earlier in the day, Gov- 
jernor Dewey said that Mr. Roose- 
velt enunciated twelve years ago) 
ithe philosophy of “divide what we| 
have left” and that this meant, in 
other words, “follow the doctrine 
of the Communist party.” 


| good reason. 


Administration has 
been mindful from its earliest 
days, and will continue to be 
mindful, of the problem of small 
business. * * * ’ 

In the light of the record that 
promise, too, is worthless and it 
will remain so even though it is 
repeated again and again and 
again. 

My opponent has now read our 
platform and he's saying, ‘Me, 
too."’ Even the New Deal knows 
that it’s time for a change 

No, we can’t live on promises. 
We must have performance this 
time—before it's too late. As we 
keep our minds set on these 
peacetime years ahead, let's re- 
member one thing: My opponent 
has offered no program for the 
peacetime years ahead except ex- 
actly the same one which failed 
for eight straight years of peace 
from 1933 to 1940. 

And let me add that the figures 
showing that failure have been 
correctly quoted by me from the 
beginning to the end of this cam- 
paign. My opponent has insinu- 
ated, though he didn’t dare say 


‘this 


it, that some figures weren't cor- | 


rect. But he has never dared to 
point out the ones he disagreed 
with. Instead he says with a 
sneer that when he was Governor 
of New York he quoted figures 
correctly. 


Rival’s Regimes End “In Red”’ 


Now, I don't recollect his quot 
ing figures at all when he was 
Governor of New York and very 
rarely since then—for one very 
In every Adminis- 
tration Mr. Roosevelt has headed 
he ended up in the red. No coun- 
try can long survive under any 
leader who only piles up a bigger 
debt each year, not just in war, 
but in peace. 

Let us as a nation relearn one 
simple thing. Our peacetime eco- 
nomic system is like a high-power 
motor. Every part of it must 
wor! or the engine will run badly 
or not at all. If one spark plug 
goes bad, the engine loses power. 
If the distributor is out of order 
or the fuel line gets stopped up 
or the carburetor goes bad, the 
whole tremendous power of the 
machine fails. 

That's the thing the New Deal 
doesn’t know and can never learn. 
It had to tinker first with one 
thing and then with another. It 
has changed the tax laws fifteen 
times in twelve years so no man 
could plan ahead. It fought first 
one part of our job-making ma- 
chinery, then another. It was 
never willing in all its years to 
let all the parts of this magnifi- 
cent American machine function 
smoothly so we could go ahead. 

It’s a shocking thing that my 
opponent, after twelve years as 
President, felt compelled to an- 
nounce, as news, last Saturday 
night, that he believes in the en- 
terprise system Yet, in all his 
campaign speeches, my opponent 
has not indicated how he will 
achieve in post-war years what 
he so tragically failed to achieve 
in peacetime years. 

Let me summarize, in brief, 
some essential parts of the pro- 
gram of action I have proposed in 
these last two months for the 
peacetime years ahead of us, Vir- 
tually every element of our pro- 
gram is something the New Deal 
has fought against or neglected, 
and cannot now, for election pur- 





lems affecting labor, agriculture 
and business in full consultation 
with all three and without dis- 
crimination against any class or 
section of our country or any 
race, color or creed. 

Proposal No. 2: Adopt an en- 
tirely hew tax structure which 
will do these things 

1. Change the personal exemp- 
tion so that a man who makes as 
little as eleven dollars a week no 
longer has an income tax taken 
out of his standard of living. 

2. Reduce personal income tax 
rates so that the tax law, after 
credit for dependents, will no 
longer take at least twenty-three 
cents out of every taxable dollar 
in the pay envelope 

3. Change and lower the income 
tax on business so that it can be 
encouraged to expand and help 
create the millions of jobs we 
need. 

4. Overhaul the entire tax struc- 
ture so that it’s simple, so that 
every one can understand it, and 
then stick to it over a period of 
years. Only if we stick to it can 
we go ahead and build and create 
jobs. That's the only way in the 
world we can ever get our na- 
tional incotse up to where it’s got 
to go after this war. The highest 
our national income under this 
administration in peacetime has 
ever reached was seventy-six bil- 
lion dollars, compared with 
eighty-nine billion dollars in the 
1920's. The only way in the world 
we can work out is to double that 
New Deal best in the peacetimes 
to come under a decent tax struc 
ture with a system which is told 
by its government to go ahead 
and go to work and produce, 


Would Widen Social Security 


Proposal No. 3: Make our So- 
cial Security System available to 
every American and not to a se- 
lected part of our people. For 
nine long years, the New Deal 
has kept twenty million Ameri- 
cans out of our Old-Age Pension 
System. The right to an old-age 
pension has become a fundamen- 
tal of our society. We can and 
must extend the system of old- 
age benefits and social security 
to all our people and build a so- 
ciety strong enough to support it. 

Proposal No. 4: Establish a def- 
inite and secure floor under farm 
prices, one we'll know about now 
and next month and next year, so 
a man can plan ahead again. Do 
it by the means outlined in my 
speech last Saturday, together 
with the other elements of that 
program and then free the Amer- 
ican farmer from dictation from 
Washington. 


Proposal No. 5: Restore free 


| collective bargaining in America 


Sprawling Government agencies 
have now established an iron rule 
over the wages, hours and chance 
to get a job of every American 
worker. We shall establish the 
Fair Employment Practice Com 
mittee as a permanent agency 
with full legal authority. We will 
then merge the balance of these 
agencies in a strong and com- 
petent Department of Labor un- 
der the leadership of a man from 
the ranks of labor. 

Proposal No. 6: Survey forth- 
with the millions of reports re- 


quired of big and little business 


poses, claim to favor. 


ty 
ahead: 


ernment policies toward the goal 
of full employment 
production at 
wages for the worker and with an 
incentive 
make good. 
tration will 


filled the Memorial Auditorium, a 
WPA project, for the address, re- 
sponding with cheers and whistles 
to each repetition of the phrase 
“again and again and again.” 


State chairman, who presided, pre- 
dicted that Erie County, 
| President 
1940, would give a large majority 
next Tuesday to Mr. Dewey. 


|ditorium an hour and a half before 
|the Governor left his train near by, 
was demonstrative. During an ear- 
lier speech by Thomas J. Curran, 
Secretary of State, a small group 
of Democrats 
conies shouted 
|the Republican candidate for the} 
|United States Senate said that his 
opponent, Senator Robert F. Wag- | 
jner, favored a fourth term. 


jtroduced to the auditorium 
|the radio audience by Mr. Curran. | 
| 

10,000 Hear Dewey at Rochester 


tion and overflowed to the streets 
| outside. 


before 
|Rochester at 5:15 P. M. He spoke} 
|from a balcony in the depot after) 





| 
| 
| 


LPL 


Program for Peacetime 
Here is the program of my par- 
for these peacetime years 


Proposal No. 1: Direct all Gov- 


through full 


a high level of 





business men to 
Your next adminis- 
work out the prob- 


for 


every year by Government and 
immediately abolish the greater 
part of them. We have done it in 
New York and we can do it in the 
nation 

Proposal No. 7: Bring a com- 
petent staff into the Department 
of Justice so that we can bring 
an end to business monopoly in 
this country instead of just talk- 
ing about it. 


President and Congress 


Proposal No. 8: Establish an 
entirely new basis between the 
President and the Congress so 
that once again each shall have 
the respect of the other and each 





When the Governor entered the} 


Edwin F, Jaeckle, Republican 
which | 


Roosevelt carried in 


The crowd, which filled the au-| 


in one of the bal- 
“we do too’ when 


The Governor was formally in- 
and | 


In a speech to 10,000 persons at} 


The crowd filled the railroad sta-| 





The Governor ieft Albany just) 
1 P. M. and arrived at/| 


BP 


PARKE-BERNET 
GALLERIES ¢ Ine 
30 E.57 ST + ZONE 22 
CNow On Exhibition 
WEEKDAYS 9 TO 5:30 


GOTHIC AND | 
RENAISSANCE ART }) 





Including the Famous 
FRA FILIPPO LIPPI 
Madonna and Child 


THE SCHINASI 
Collection 


Public Chuction Sale 
November 3-4 al 2 


aa 


: ing problem of Jewish homeless- 


‘i * DR. DANIEL POLING 


i 


g ° 
CARNEGIE HALL I 
r 
r 
t 


a 
gZIONIST ORGANIZATION 
: 


Tome wn sma moons ane eee mon 


His talk was largely a preview 


of his address in the evening at 
Buffalo, particularly in its refer- 
ences to the alleged broken prom- | 
ises of Mr. Roosevelt. 


BALFOUR DAY 
DEMONSTRATION 
FOR A DECISION 

NOW ON PALESTINE 


AS A JEWISH 
COMMONWEALTH 


Join in the huge demonstration 
at Carnegie Hall to-night 

voice your demand for a just 
and speedy solution to the press- 


ness. 


Speakers: 
* SENATOR ROB’T F, WAGNER 


Chairman, American Palestine Committee 


President, World Christian Endeavor Union 


* DR. STEPHEN S, WISE 


Co-Chairman, American Zionist 
Emergency Council 


Presiding: 
* DR. ISRAEL GOLDSTEIN 


President, Zionist Organization of America 


TO-NIGHT, NOV. 1, 1944 
8:30 P. M. 


Sith ST. & Tth AVE, 
New York Gity 


Doors open at 7:15 P. M, 


ADMISSION FREE! 


Tickets may be secured from 


OF AMERICA 


41 East 42nd St., New York 17,N.¥. 





will be willing to work with the | with a government 


other in the traditional American 
fashion. 

My opponent has continuously 
criticized and attempted to purge 
the members of the Houses of 
Congress elected by the people. 
He has so abused and insulted 
the Congress that his own Senate 
leader rebelled. 

Just this year he stood up in the 
Senate and denounced the words 


| of a veto message by my oppo- 


more 
“ge 


“as 
and as 


and I 
than honest”’ 


nent, 
clever 


quote, 


| calculated and deliberate assault 


——————===E=E=Ee—! 


| being introduced by Thomas £.| 
Broderick, Republican 
Monroe County. 


leader of | 


‘ee 


i TO-NIGHT! i 


| 
| 


| 





on the legislative integrity of ev- 
ery member of Congress.’’ 

That declaration was cheered to 
the rafters by the members of the 
Senate and the members of the 
House swarmed into the Senate 
chamber to congratulate’ the 
speaker 

That's what three terms of un- 
limited power do to a man. That's 
why four terms, or sixteen years, 
is the most dangerous threat to 
our freedom ever proposed by 
anybody. That's one reason why 
I believe with our great Presi- 
dents of the past that two terms 
must be established as the limit 
by Constitutional amendment. 

We've seen now that a New 
Deal Congress no longer trusts 
or accepts leadership from my 
opponent It’s generally agreed 
that the House and probably the 
Senate will be Republican next 
year 

So already, already Mr. Roose 
velt has undertaken to insult the 
new leadership In his speech 
of last Friday night he accused 
the men who will be the new 
leaders of placing political ad- 
vantage above devotion to coun- 
try just because they 
pledged themselves to a program 
for lasting peace. We must not 
have—we cannot have—four years 
more of stalemate and hostility 
between the President of the 
United States and our Congress. 


Hits “‘“Government by Abuse”’ 


We can and we will restore to 
the White House a willingness to 


work out problems with the Con- 


gress as equals in the American 
fashion over the conference table. 
We must bring an end to govern- 
ment by abuse and by smear. 

Lastly, I propose that, with an 
end to name calling and with un- 
selfish devotion, we unite as a 
people behind the cause of a just 
and lasting peace through an or- 
ganization with the strength to 
prevent future wars. 


By these specific means and 


—_— 


td 


ROLLATOR 
REFRIGERATORS 


HOME HEATERS 
=e 


GAS RANGES 


| our children 


publicly | 


made 
the ablest men and women in this 
country, we can restore honesty 
to our government and we can 


once again unite to secure the fu- 
ture which is our birthright 

Let us again make ‘‘getting 
ahead"’ a vital part of the Ameri 
can language and of the Ameri 
can thought. For years the New 
Dealers have been sneering at the 
old American idea of ‘getting 
ahead.’’ Let us make sure that 
can again believe 
there is room for everybody to get 


up of 


. Dewey’s Buffalo Speech Offering an Eight-Point Post-War Program 


Let us naW 
masthead 


ahead in this country 
that 
and set out 
the future 

Let us determine that the end 
of this war will bring our young 
men and women home to the kind 
of an America they ha 
all the world With high 
purpose and integrity and relying 
upon the guidance of the God of 
us We can save freedom in 
and go forward once 


principle to our 


sure course for 


on a 


e earned 


over 


all of 
America 
again 


I thank you 


ADVERTISEMENT, _ 


PLANNED ADVERTISING 


CHARLES W. HOYT COMPANY, INC._——- 


How Large Should an Advertisement Be? 


The current paper shortage gives 
special emphasis to guarding 


against waste in determining the 


size of advertisements. To the 


| Charles W. Hoyt Company this rep- 


resents no new requirement. 


Back in 1909, when our agency 
was founded, most advertisers 
used what would now be con 
sidered small space. Also, many 
of our clients were mail order 
advertisers, which gave us an 
unusual opportunity to judge 
the relative effectiveness of ad- 
vertisements of different sizes. 


| Through the years we have made 


extensive use of fractional space 
units, and we believe we have 
developed special skill in build- 
ing such advertisements. Basi- 
cally, however, the choice of 


| size depends on the job to be 


done and the idea being featured. 


FOR EXAMPLE: Two of our clients, 
both large newspaper advertisers 
in the food field, are spending 
approximately the same sum in 


| selected markets. Item A is a 


long-established product pur- 


chased at frequent intervals, and | 


is supported mainly by small 
space advert ising. 


Item B, on the other hand, is 
relatively new and calls for cre- 
ating a new habit. Here large 


|space advertisements are being 


used. 

Most significant of all is the fact 
that both campaigns exemplify our 
principles of Planned Advertising 
(Reg. U.S. Patent Office). The key 
idea around which the advertising 
is built is repeated on the point of 
sale material and on the product 
itself. It is the basis of the sales- 
man's presentation to the trade and 
of retail selling to the consumer. 


> >. a 
In brief, all selling forces are 
fully coordinated, thus assuring 
getting more work out of adver- 
tising dollars. 


Perhaps Planned Advertising 
offers you the answer to your 
future sales problems. We shal! 
be glad to talk things over upon 
request. Charles W. Hoyt Com- 
pany, Inc., 551 Fifth Avenue, 
New York 17, N. Y 
Established 1909 “ 


gADY SOON... 


better products 
for a better world 


The minute conditions permit, Norge wif! 


once more produce its famous line of home 


appliances with the exclusive time-saving, 


work-saving, money-saving features. More 


than ever, these models will truly be “prod- 


ucts of experience,” because skills and 


techniques acquired in 100% war prodac- 


tion make Norge postwar appliances better 


designed, better engineered, better bush. 


“NORGE 


BEFORE YOU BUY 


NORGE—A Borg-Warner Industry 


WARREN CONNOLLY CO., INC. 


DISTRIBUTORS 


253 WEST 64th ST. 
New York 23, N. Y. 





MISS ANNE PEYTON 


TROTH ANNOUNCED 


LISTS ATTENDANTS. 


She Will Be Wed on Nov. 18 in| 


Princeton to Lieut. Irving 
B. ainuils Jr. of wie ig 


Special to Tux New Yorx Trmes 
N. J., Oct 


PRINCETON, 
Miss Anne duPont Peyton, daugh- 
ter of Mr. and Mrs. Bernard Peyton 
of this place, and Lieut. Irving 
Bowdoin Kingsford Jr., AUS, have 
completed plans for their marriage, 
which will take place Nov. 18 in 
Trinity Episcopal Church here. 

The prospective bride will have 
Miss Elizabeth Aldrich for her maid 
of honor. The bridesmaids will be 
the Misses Mary Hewitt, Nancy 
Milbank and Mary Millard of New 
York and Elizabeth Brigham 
Princeton 

Lieut. (j.g.) Harold L. Kalt 
USNR, of New York, will be best 
man for the bridegroom-elect, who 
is a son of Mr. and Mrs. Irving B 
Kingsford of Bernardsville The 
ushers will be Bernard Peyton Jr., 
brother of Miss Peyton; Second 
Lieut. John O. Dozier, AUS, of St. 
Louis; Lieut. Basil Wagner Jr., 
AUS, of Baltimore; Capt. Grenville 
Clark Jr.. USMCR, of New York; 
Capt. Robert L. Terry, AUS, 
Princeton, and Second Lieut. Clar- 
ence P. Mitchell, AUS, of Far Hills. 

After the ceremony a reception 
will be given at the Peyton home. 


Ix 


Seefensinne Bier 


Tue New York Time 
WESTFIELD, N. J., Oct. 31 
Miss Jane Goodman, daughter of 
Mr. and Mrs. Melville Goodman of 
this place, has completed plans for 
her marriage to Alfred E. Miller 
of Plainfield, son of Mrs. H. E. 
Miller of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, and 

the late Mr. Miller 

The wedding will be performed 
on Nov. 18 in St. Paul’s Episcopal 
Church here by the Rev. Arthur F. 
O'Donnell, the rector. A reception 
will follow at the Echo Lake Coun- 
try Club 

Miss Goodman will have Mrs. 
Robert Marsh of Westfield 
matron of honor ang Miss Shirley 


Special to s 


Peniston of Westfield as maid of! 


honor. The bridesmaids will be 
Miss Barbara Merrill, also of this 
place, and Miss Reta Pratt of Bel- 
mont, Mass. John Finger of Read- 
ing, Pa., will be best man. The 
ushers will be Lieut. Robert Esser. 
USNR, of Cedar Rapids; Norton 
Miller of Akron, Ohio, and A. A 
Thompson of Plainfield 


HARRIET E. GURNEY WED 


Bride of Sgt. William A. Cone,| 


Yale Ex-Athlete, in South 
Announcement has been made! 
here of the marriage of Miss Har-| 
riet Elsa Gurney, daughter of Mr.| 
and Mrs. Robert J. Gurney of Box-! 
woods, Fairmont Park, Gastonia. | 
N. C., to Sgt. William A. Cone, son 


’ 
| 


of Mr. and Mrs. Clarence Cone of | 


New York, which took place last 
Wednesday at the home of 
bride’s parents. 

The. bride-elect was graduated 
from ‘Stephens College and Duke| 
University. Sergeant Cone was 
graduated from Phillips Exeter 
Academy and Yale. He attended 
also the Graduate School of Busi- 
ness Administration at Harvard. 
He is a member of the Yale Club 
of New York. While at Yale, Ser-| 
geant Cone was a letter man on} 
the Yale track team and at one! 
time was intercollegiate pole vault! 
champion. 


SALLY RAYMOND’S PLANS 


She Will Be Wed on Saturday to 


Lieut. N. Peter Rathvon Jr. 
Miss Sally Raymond, daughter 
of Mr. and Mrs. Anan Raymond 
of Kenilworth, Ill., will be married 
to Lieut. (j. g.) N. Peter Rathvon 

Jr., USNR, son of N. Peter Rath-| 
von, president of Radio Keith| 
Orpheum Corporation, and Mrs. | 
Rathvon of New York and Edge-| 
water Point, N. Y., 


tional Church, Evanston, III. 

The bride’s only attendants will! 
be the Misses Joan Francis Rath- 
von and Judith Hall Rathvon, sis-| 
ters of the prospective bridegroom. | 
Mr. Rathvon will be best man for| 
his son. 

A reception will be given at the 
home of the bride-elect’s parents 
in Kenilworth. 


} 





Isabelle Thompson Married 


Announcement has been made 
here of the marriage of Miss Isa- 
belle Thompson, daughter of James 
Thompson of Brewster, N. Y., and 
the laté Mrs. Thompson, to Harold 
P. Farrington of Danbury, Conn., 
son of the late Mr. and Mrs. Hor- 
ace Farrington of Boston, which! 
took place Saturday evening in St 
Peter’s Episcopal Church, Monroe, 
Conn. The ceremony was per- 
formed by ,the Rev. William An- 
thony. 


Child to J. R. Gimbernats Jr. 


A daughter, their fourth child, 
was born to Mr. and Mrs. Jules R. 
Gimbernat Jr. of Old Orchard, Glen| 
Cove, L. I., on Friday at the Hark- 
ness Pavilion, Columbia - Presby- 
terian Medical Center. Mrs. Gim- 
bernat is the former Miss Ruth 
Sloan, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. 
John Sloan of this city | 


Notes | 


NEW YORK 
Lieut. Comdr. Geoffrey McN. 
Gates, USNR, and Mrs. Gates will 
be at the Pierre for the season. 
Mr. and Mrs. Merle Thorpe of 
Hollin Hall, Alexandria, Va., are! 
at the Biltmore. 


of | 


as! 


the| 
{Remember 


| The 


31— 


of | 


Miss Charna R. Slonim 


MISS CHARNA SLONIM 
A PROSPECTIVE BRIDE 


Special to Tue New Yor« Times 
NEW ROCHELLE, N. Y., Oct 
31—-Mr. and Mrs. Marx D. Slonim 
of New Rochelle have announced 
the engagement of their daughter, 
Charna R., to Pfc. Philip A. Weis- 
man, AUS, son 


Ohio 

Miss Slonim was graduated last 
week from Cornell University with 
the class of ‘45. Mr. Weisman 
was graduated in 1943 from Cor- 
nell, where he was elected to Phi 
Beta Kappa. He is now attending 
the College of Medicine of the Uni- 
versity of Cincinnati under the 
Army Specialized Training Pro- 
gram and expects to be graduated 
in June. 


Julianelle—Ressor 
Special to Tas New Yoru Times, 


NARBERTH, N. J., Oct. 31 
Announcement has been made by 
Mrs. Louis A. Julianelle of this 
place, formerly of 
i oe 
daughter, Emilie Surgisson, to 
James Charles Ressor, son of R 
P. Ressor of Ridgefield, Conn. 


Davis—Howard 


Mr. and Mrs. Frank Allen Davis 
of Queens Village, Queens, have 
announced the engagement 
their daughter, Mildred Alice, 


|Ensign Thomas Calhoun Howard, | 
Eleanor How- | 


USMS, son of Mrs. 
ard of New Brighton, Pa. 
wedding will take place 
month. 


SCHOOL BENEFIT TONIGHT | 


| Berkshire Industrial Farm to} 
Gain by ‘| Remember Mama’ 


The 
next 


A large subscription has been re- 
ported for the performance of “I} 
Mama,” 


the leading roles, tonight at the 
Music Box Theatre, which has been 
taken over for the benefit of Berk- 
shire Industrial Farm. Mrs. | 
George H. Richards, executive}! 
chairman, and Mrs. Frederick E.| 
Donaldson, chairman of the ticket | 
jcommittee, head the group in| 
|charge of the plans for the event. | 

Proceeds will be used to provide 
scholarships for boys who could 
not otherwise be cared for at Berk- 
shire Farm. The beneficiary pro- 
vides a year-round home and school 
for 150 problem boys who come 
from broken homes or receive in- 
adequate home life. 


JANET THAMER A FIANCEE 


Darien Girl to Become Bride of, 
William M. Cooper of Army 


Special to Taz New York Times | 


DARIEN, Conn., Oct. 31—Mr. | 


on Saturday|and Mrs. George H. Thamer of this) Which includes Barry Fitzgerald, 
afternoon in the First Congrega-|Place have made known the en-| Beulah Bondi, Walter Sande, Mary 


gagement of their daughter, Janet, 

to Corp. William M. Cooper of the | 
|Army, son of Mr. and Mrs. Wil-| 
liam A. Cooper, also of Darien. 


Plan Spence-Chapin Dance 


Plans for the annual Silver 
Spoon Cocktail Party and Tea 
Dance, which will be given Dec. 21 
at the Stork Club to aid the 
|Spence- Chapin Adoption Service, | 
will be discussed tomorrow at a 
luncheon to be given by Mrs. Knée- 
land L. Green and Mrs. A. Harris 
Gaines at the Hotel Beekman. 
Members of the arrangements com- 
mittee include also Mrs. Harold H 
Hackett, Mrs. James C. Lambeth, 
Mrs. William H. Hynard, Mrs. Ben- 
jamin Paskus, Mrs. Frederick V. 
Schaettler and Miss Gloria Rei- 
singer. 


M. S. Szymezak Weds in South 
Special to Tas New Yorx T’meEs 

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—An- 
nouncement was made here today 
of the marriage on Friday in At- 
lanta of Mrs. Morag MacLeod! 
Zamoyski to M. S. Szymeczak, a 
member of the Board of Governors | 
of the Federal Reserve System.| 
ceremony was performed in 
the home of Mr. and Mrs. Frank H 
Neely. Mr. and Mrs. Szymczak will 
reside in Washington. 


Son to Mrs. Samuel Sloan 3d 


A son was born to Lieut. Samue! 
Sloan 3d of the Army Air Forces, 
now serving overseas, and Mrs. 
Sloan of 41 East Sixty-fifth Street | 
,on Saturday at the LeRoy Sani-|* 
tarium. Mrs. Sloan is the former} 
Miss Meralen Reed of Little Rock, 
Ark. The child will be named for 


| his father. 


Mr. and Mrs. Herman F.. Whiton'!- 


are expected to arrive today at the) 
Ritz-Carlton from their summer! 
home in Jericho, L. I. 

Mrs. J. Oliver Purvis Jr. and 
Mrs. Howard Young have come 
from Baltimore to the Waldorf- 
Astoria to stay for the remainder 
of the week. 

Lieut. André V. Smolianinoff, 
USNR, and Mrs. Smolianinoff have 
come from Miami to the St. Regis 

Baroness de Villiers Terrage and 
Miss Jeanne Marie de Villiers Ter- 
rage, who were in Edgartown, 
Martha's Vineyard, for several 
months, have returned to the 
Savoy-Piaza to spend the season. 


1-2-3) 


NO FEDERAL TAX 
Upen daily and Sunday 5 P. M 
(Closed Monday) 


TABLE D’HOTE 
DINNER ‘rom 52°° 


Also.a la Carte 
123 E. 54th $t, PL. 3-9/3! 


a 


of Mr. and Mrs. | 
|Herman J. Weisman of Dayton, 


Scarsdale, | 
of the engagement of her! 


of | 
to} 


|started Nov. 


lby 


| wood. 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 


ELAINE BURKHARDT gee 
ENGAGED TO MARRY, 


Student at Centenary Junior) 


College Fiancee of Frank S. 
Pohanka Jr. of Navy 





Mr. and Mrs. Harry 
Burkhardt of Mount Vernon, N. 
announced here yesterday 
engagement of their daughter, 
Elaine, 
Jr., USNR, son of Mr. 
Pohanka of Silver Spring, Md. 

The prospective bride was grad- 
uated from 
in East Northfield, Mass., 


. 


to Frank Sales Pohanka! 
and Mrs.| 


Frederic 


the | 


Northfield Seminary) 
and is a} 


senior at Centenary Junior Col-| 


lege in Hackettstown, N. J. 


| the Sidwell Friends School 


|degree Monday from 
j}chusetts Institute of 
|He entered the Navy 
in 1943 and next week will enter! 


the Naval Reserve Midshipmen’s'merly with the Metropolitan Opera, |Old Lace.” 


School at Columbia University. 


Stolz—Reeve 
Special to Tux New Yorx Times. 


WOODBRIDGE, Conn., Oct. 31— 
Mr. and Mrs. Alexander F. Stolz 
of this place have made known the 
engagement of their daughter, | 
Margaret Jean, to Lieut. Robert | 
Morris Reeve, AUS, son of Mrs. 
Frederick E. Reeve of Maplewood, 
N. J., and the late Mr. Reeve, 


Mango—Madden 

Special to Taz New Yor« Times. 
WEST HARTFORD, Conn., 
31—Mr. and Mrs. James Arthur 
Mango of this place have an- 
nounced the engagement of their 
daughter, Betty Goodwin, to Pfc. 

Edward F. Madden Jr., AUS. 


Oct. | 


Her fiancé was graduated from | 
in| 
| Washington and received his B. S.| 
the Massa-| 
Technology. | 
V-12 Unit} 


iday at the Century. 


| 


| 





SLER MUSICAL | 


| 
| 
' 
| 


} 
| 


; humdrum existence. 


| outstanding 


| sical 


FRANK PAY ARRIVES 
IN'HARVEY TONIGHT 


Plays straight Rete: Role in Mary 
Chase Fantasy—Josephine 
Hull in Featured Part 


By SAM ZOLOTOW 
A comic of established reputa- 
tion in radio, vaudeville and night 
clubs, Frank Fay is undertaking a 
straight role as the star of “Har- 
vey,” opening tonight at the 
Forty-eighth Street Theatre. Mary 


| Chase is the author of this whim- 


fantasy, which comes here 
bearing Boston’s endorsement. 

In this offering Mr. Fay is called 
upon to impersonate a man who 
finally achieves 


Occupying the featured role is an| 
actress, Josephine | 
Hull, in her first Broadway assign- 


}ment since she gave a memorable 


John Gurney, bass-baritone for- 


\who has the male lead in “Rhap-| 
|sody. ” The show is due next Mon-| 


“IN FESTIVAL FINALE 


Repeat Earlier Performance of 
Three New Works on the 
Library of Congress Stage 


| night. 


By JOHN MARTIN 


Special to Taz New York Times 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—Martha | 
Graham and her company of danc- 


SCREEN NEWS [er ctoses tne manic sertivat nea 


lin the Library of Congress under 


Warners Plan Remshe of 
‘8 Men on a Horse’ 


o THe New Yor«K TIMES 


Oct. 31-— 


Special t 
HOLLYWOOD, Cailif., 


the auspices of the Elizabeth | 


Sprague Coolidge Foundation to-| 
night with the repetition of last) 
night's performance of three new 
|works especially commissioned for} 
ithe festival both as to choreogra-| 
~|phy and music. It is the first time | 


= lity. 


GRAHAM DANCERS — 


portrayal as one of the daffy 
Brewster sisters in “Arsenic and 


signed by John Root. 

Brock Pemberton is the producer 

and Antoinette Perry the director, 
}a combination of time-tested abil- 
In their respective capacities 
both were associated with Miss 
Chase’s previous play, “Now 
You’ve Done It,”’ which had a brief 
run on Broadway seven years ago. 

Admission scale: Tonight, $1.20- 
$4.80; other nights, $1.20 - $4.20; 
j/matinees (Wednesday and Satur- 
day), $1.20-$3. Curtain: 8:40. 


Shumlin Play to Close 

“The Visitor” will wind up its 
stay at Henry Miller's on Saturday 
Kenneth White's semi-psy- 
chological melodrama, 
from the Leane Zugsmith-Carl 
|Randau book of the same name, 
had its premiére on Oct. 17 and 


will have been played twenty- | 


| three times. Herman Shumlin pro- 
duced and directed it with a cast 
lof eight, including Walter N. 
Greaza, Frances Carson, Richard 
Hylton, Thomas Chalmers, Ralph 
Forbes, Dorrit Kelton, Anna Minot 
and Will Hare. Despite the short | 
engagement, twenty-three backers | 
will profit from the venture, War- | 
ners having bought the screen 


Warner Brothers is planning to re-|/in a number of years that Miss | rights in a pre-production deal for 


Men on a Horse,” 
Bracken, borrowed 
from Paramount, for the part of; 
the Milquetoast horse picker.) 


Warners previously 
“Three Men on a Horse” in 1936} 
| with Frank McHugh in the lead. 


make “Three 
with Eddie 


| Rosa, Cailif., 


scenes for “Hat in the Ring,” the| “Jeux de Printemps.” 
|Capt. Eddie Rickenbacker picture| music in itself, 
|which has been on and off the| pretty far removed from Miss Gra-| 
| Twentieth Century-Fox production} ham’s style and might more fit- 
| schedule several times during the| tingly serve as a suite for the bal- 
Actual studio} let. 
production of the picture now is|seven in which Miss Graham is 
| expected to be started early in Jan-/ not one, and has bits of amusing 
Fred MacMurray por-| stage directions, in the manner of 


| last nine months. 


| uary with 


| traying the famed aviator. 
Fritz Leiber, Jack} ‘“prompter” 
Nancy Gates and Barton| gela Kennedy. 
with Mady|MacLane have been cast for prin-| sition, however, it lacks body and | 


Christians and Oscar Homolka in| cipal parts in “Spanish Main,” the} point. 


John Emery, 


La Rue, 


proposed RKO-Radio sea epic. The 
picture, with Maureen O’Hara and 
| Paul Henreid in the leads, will be 
15. Frank Borzage| 
| will be the director and Robert Fel- 
| lows the producer. 


Of Local Origin 


Two new films will open in| 
Broadway theatres this morning. 
|At the Palace, the new attraction 
will be “The Master Race,” an Ed-| 
ward A. Golden production filmed | 
for RKO. George Coulouris, Stan- 
ley Ridges, Osa Massen, Carl Es- 
mond, Nancy Gates and Morris| 
Carnovsky are among the featured 
players in the topical drama... 
At the Paramount, the new offer- 
ing will be “I Love a Soldier,” a! 
romantic comedy drama produced 
Paramount starring Paulette 
Goddard and Sonny Tufts. Pro-| 
}duced and directed by Mark Sand- 
rich, the film has a supporting cast | 





| Treen and Marie MacDonald. 


“Laura” today starts its fourth 
jand final week at the Roxy. 
“To Have and Have Not” begins | 
la fourth week today at the Holly- 
“Abroad With Two 
Yanks” continues for a _ second 
week today at the Globe, while 


“Rainbow Island” enters its second|wWhich animates the highest hu-| 


and last week today at Loew’ s Cri- 
terion. . . . “Pique Dame,” the 
French film at the Fifth Avenue 
|Playhouse, starts a third week to-| 
day. 


the French picture at Fifty- -fifth | kins, 


Street Playhouse, goes into a sixth| 
week today. 





Dan Arnolds Jr. Have Daughter| 
Tuer New Yorwe Times 


BROOKLINE, Mass., Oct. 31- 


Special to 


Director Lloyd Bacon is in Santa| “Imagined Wings,” 
filming background! score by Darius Milhaud, 


| dark 


| the 


“32 Rue de Montmartre, | joyous young vision. Erick Haw- 


A | vided 


Graham has created her choreog- 
raphy to scores already completed, 
but the results, at least in two out 
lof the three cases, showed her to 
|be in no wise hampered by this 


produced | limitation. 


Of the three pieces, the first was| 
| the least successful. Entitled | 
it is set toa 
called | 
Very nice 


it is nevertheless 


It is danced by a group of} 


Shakespearean plays, spoken by a 
in the person of An- 
As a dance compo-| 


The second work is of very dif- 
ferent stature. To music of Paul | 
Hindemith, inspired by a poem of 
Mallarme on “Herodiade,” Miss| 
Graham has created a powerful} 
study of a woman awaiting a “mys- 
terious destiny’ of which she has 
no knowledge. She has called it 
“Mirror Before Me,” and into it 
she has poured a somber tension 
ithat is relentless and altogether | 
gripping. The music is rich and| 
in color and the action on} 
the stage meets it magnificently) 
;on its own terms. Miss Graham’s| 
|personal performance must rank 
among her most extraordinary| 





|achievements, and May O'Donnell, | 


who dances the only other role 
But perhaps the real triumph of | 
program is “Appalachian 
Spring,” for which Aaron Copland | 
jhas written a score of fresh and} 
singing beauty. It is, on its sur- 
face, a piece of early Americana, | 
but in reality it is a celebration of 
the human spirit. The action cen- 
ters around a husbandman and his 
bride who have built a house and 


dedicate it with their friends and 





_|fellows. Nothing Miss Graham has 


done before has had such deep joy- 
ousness about it. 

There is throughout the work a) 
very moving sense of the future, 
of the fine and simple idealism) 


man motives. The work reaches) 
its peak in a solo by Miss Graham! 
as the bride, which is an extraordi- 
narily affecting presentation of 


Mence Cunningham, Miss| 
O’Donnell and the others give her| 
|notable support in a truly beauti- 
|ful work. 

Isamu. Noguchi has designed 
three sensitive and original set- 
tings and one Gilfond has pro- 
some nice costumes. Louis 





daughter was born to Radio Tech- Horst conducted the excellent or- 
nician Second Class Dan Hinckley |chestra. It is good, indeed, to see 


Arnold Jr., USNR, 


and Mrs. Arn-|Miss Graham 


dancing to music 


old of Washington, Conn., on Sat-|which touches her own level of 
urday at the Chelsea Naval Hospi-! artistry. 


tal in Boston. Mrs. Arnold is the 


former Miss Jean Wood of Brook-| 


line. The child will be named Jean 
Marie. 


Jane J. Gallien Married 
Special to Tus New Yorx Timas 
EAST ORANGE, N. J., Oct. 31 
Dr. and Mrs. Robert H. Gallien! 
of this city have announced the! 
j|marriage of their daughter, Miss) 
Jane Johnston Gallien, to Ensign| 
George Alain Vitray, USNR, son 





of Mrs. Laura Vitray of New York, 
which took place on Sunday in 
nual Episcopal Church, Miami, 


Salen de 


A Tea Room of 
distinction and charm 
in the Parisian manner 


Luncheon « Afternoon Tea 
Special Luncheon $? 


Finest Chocolates and Pastries 
City Delivery « Mail Orders 


697 Fifth Ave. (55th St.) N. Y. 6 
EL dorado 53-5354 


}secret; 


|weeks and perhaps longer. 


$150,000 plus weekly payments 
based on a percentage of the box- 
| office receipts. Henry Miller's will 
be dark until “The Streets 
Guarded” arrives on Nov. 17. 


The spokesman for “Trio” 
yesterday to say that the Dorothy 
‘and Howard Baker play, now try- 


ing out in Philadelphia, with Lydia) 


St. Clair, Lois Wheeler and Rich- 
jard Widmark heading the cast, 
|would come to the Cort next 
Wednesday night. The Shubert 
office said contracts had not been 
signed. The current occupant of 
the Cort is “No Way Out,” which | 
opened Monday night. 

Barring any changes, here's how | 
next week’s schedule shapes up at 
|the moment: “Rhapsody,” Monday 
at the Century; “Robin Hood 
Tuesday at the Adelphi; “Trio, 
Wednesday at the Cort; “Walk 
Hard,” Friday at the 135th Street | 
Library Theatre; “Spook Scan- 
dals,”’ Friday midnight at the Bel- 
mont. ‘There seemed to be tast | 
doubt yesterday whether the last 


‘named would make its bow at the| 


Belmont. 


Drama Critics Elect 


The New York Drama Critics) 
Circle met yesterday at the “Hotel, 


Algonquin and re-elected its offi- 
|cers for another year. They are 
Howard Barnes of The Herald- 
Tribune, president; Arthur Pollock 
of The Brooklyn Daily Eagle, vice 
president; Wilella Waldorf of The 


|Post, treasurer; and George Freed-| 


-|assists her superbly. ‘lley of The Morning ‘Telegraph, 


secretary and corresponding secre- 
jtary. The Circle also changed its 
system of balloting to find the sea- 
son’s best play. Hereafter there 
will be one nominating ballot, in 
then general discussion, 
then signed ballots. If no play 
wins by a simple majority after 
five ballots, there will be no award. 
Last year there was a single bal- 
lot and since no play had a major- 
ity no prize was given. 

Last announced for a Broadway 
| unveiling on New Year’s Eve, 
\*“Good Night, Ladies,” co- starring 
| Skeets Gallagher and James Elli- 
son, is in no great rush to get 
here. The farce is now scheduled 
to open Dec. 25 in Philadelphia, 
where it will remain for four 
Co- 
producer Howard Lang is now 
casting the play at his offices in 
the St. James Theatre Building. 
Edward Clarke Lilley will direct. 

Herman Shumlin yesterday 
urged the Council of Actors Equity 


ito help set up machinery for the 


to make its own seasonal 
for excellence in  play- 
writing, acting, producing, direct- 
ing, etc. The Council took the pro- 
posal under advisement and ap- 
pointed Augustin Duncan, Clarence 
Derwent and Calvin Thomas to 


theatre 
awards 


| study it. 


Leschetizky ; Assn. ‘to Dine Nov. 6 

The annual dinner of the Lesche-| 
tizky Association of America will! 
take place next Monday evening, 
Nov. 6, at the Savoy-Plaza Hotel 
Dr. Carol Liszniewski will show his 
own motion pictures of Paderewski 
and other musicians. Mrs. Walter 
Golde, president of the association, 
310 Riverside Drive, is in charge of 
the arrangements. 


Other Amusement News Page 20 | 


WEONESDAY, NOVEMBER Ist BY 


HENRY « 1a PENSEE 





The Waleed frm, 


AT SUPPER 


ctor Borce 
Boy Sisters 


DINNER & SUPPER 


Nat 
Branpwynne 


and his Orchestra 


MISCHA Bor ...i si. 


Orchestra alternoting ot Supper 
Cover from 10:30, $2 


NO COVER FOR SERVICE MEN 
AND WOMEN IN UNIFORM 


Sert Room—Fashion Show 
Wednesday, November 1s? 
MILGRIM 


| Music Hall 


escape from a| 


Lucky fellow! | and others 


The scenery was de- 


contrived | 


called | 


hen 


| METROPOLITAN 








AMUSEMENTS 


For Service Men 
and Women 


“99 Park,’’ headquarters of the 
New York City Defense Recreation 
Committee, Inc.,* offers a partial 
list of free amusements available 
today through the generosity of the 
entertainment world. Afternoon 
tickets from 11 A. M.; evening tick- 
ets after 4 P. M. Apply 99 Park 
Avenue (at Fortieth Street) for 
ticketa. 
Officers apply to the Officers | 
Service Committee at the Hote! 
Commodore for comparable services | 
at reduced rates. 


STAGE PLAYS 


Tickets available at 99 Park Ave- 
nue for matinee and evening per- 
formances of legitimate Broadway 
plays through the courtesy of the 
League of New York Theatres. 


MOTION PICTURES 
Rivoli Roxy 
Capitol Strand 
dlobe 
State 
Laffmovie 


Paramount 
Mayfair 


PARTIES AND MISCELLANEOUS 

(Apply 99 Park Avenue for passes.) 

Staff Students Social Committee of 
Hunter College, tea dance, 3 P. M. 

St. Nicholas Arena, roller skating, 
7:30 to 11 P. M. | 

Miss Julie’s Studio, private dancing 
lessons, 1 to 4:30 P. M. 

Town Hall, Maxim Schapiro, Rus- | 
sian pianist, 8:30 P. M. 

Clara de Hirsch Residenct, dance, 
entertainment, refreshments, 8:30 





Tours, 
to 1 | 


P. M. 

NBC Behind - the - Scenes 
Rockefeller Center, 9 A. M. 
P. M., 5 to 11 P. M. 

(No passes required.) 


Sloane House, Y. M. C. A., 356 West 
Thirty-fourth Street, dance, re- 
freshments, 8:30 P. M. 

National Catholic Community Serv- 
ice, 17 East Fifty-first Street, 
dance, orchestra, 8:30 P. M. 


*Member agency of the New York 
Wear Fund. 


Richard Russell in Song Recital 
A song recital was given at the 
|/Times Hall last night by Richard 
|Russell, tenor, accompanied by 
Clinton Reed at the piano. Mr. 
Russell's program included Torelli’s 
“Tu Lo Sai,” “Salut Demeure” 
\from Gounod’s “Faust” and/| 
Franck's “La Procession.” There 
were other songs by Giordani, Do- | 
naudy, Scarlatti, Hahn, Massenet, 
Munro, Handel, Arne, Mendels- 
sohn, Marum, Charles, Curry and) 
Beach. 


TICKETS ON SALE NOW 





| 
| 
i 








Are 


Tues. Nov. 21 
Thru Sun. Dec. 3 


MATS SUNS NOV 26, DEC 3 
ALL SEATS RESERVED 
$1.25, 1.75, 2.50, 3, 3.50. 4.25 
TAX INCLUDED 
CHILDREN HALF PRICE MATS 


Mail Orders Promptly Filled 





al MADISON $Q.GARDEN 


yer NEW 


Wane til 


thru DEC. 10 


Les Syiphides, Senti- 
Memories (World Pre- 
niere), Bolero. TOM'W EVE.: Swan 
Lake, Brahms Variations, Constantia. 


INTERNATIONAL THEATRE 


Columbus Circle at 59 St. CO. 5-1173 
Eves. incl. Sun. & Sat. & Sun. Mats 
$1.20 to $4.20. Tax Incl. No. Mon Pert 


TONIGHT 8:30: 
mental Colloquy, 


OPERA 


nwouse LAST 5 DAYS 


TONIGHT: Graduation Ball, Dim Lustre, Three- 
Cornered Hat. TOM'W: Swan Lake, Pillar of 
Fire, Fancy Free, Graduation Ball. 


$. HUROK presents 


~ RUSSIAN 
BALLET 


Evenings including Sunday, 8:30: 1.20 to 4,20 
Matinees Saturday & Sunday, 2:30: 1.20 to 3.00 
2000 SEATS $1 te $1.50 (plus tax) AT ALL PERFS. 


TOWN HALL, TONIGHT at 8:30 


= SCHAPIRO 


_PIANIST _—s(Steinwa (Steinway) __— Judson Mgt. Judson Mgt. 
CARNEGIE HALL, “CARNEGIE HALL, Fri. Eve. at 8:30—Nov. Eve. at 8:30—Nov. 3 


cam. REYES 


CUBAN 
VIOLINIST 
__Mat Haensel & e Jones 


} (8 Bald win) 
MONDAY, NOV. 6 at 8: 30 P. M. 
TUESDAY, NOV. 7 at 6 P. M. 


STOKOWSKI 


N. Y. CITY SYMPHONY 


ROMAN TOTENBERG, Soloist: BARBER, Violin) 
Concerto, BRAHMS Ist e WAGNER Tristan) 
e HAENDEL Overture 
N. Y. CITY CENTER, (31 W. 55 ST. 
MAYOR F. H. LA GUARDIA, Pres 
Seats NOW at BoxOffice $1.80, 1.20, 600. Tax Inet. 


NADINE WATERS 


bo Negro Soprano 








in a recital of Classic-Modern 
& Spiritual Songs 
* ARPAD SANDOR at the Plano - 
Seats $1. $1.50) $2 Plus Tax NOW at Box Office 
or at Blumetein Dept, Store (bale.). a WwW. 125 St. 
MGT. AMEDEO PASSE 
TOWN HALL—Sat, Eve., Nov. th, at 8:30 


TONIGHT AT 8:40 
> Violin and Harpsichord Sonata Concert 


© avexanoen SCHNEIDER, visu 
RALPH KIRKP ATRICK, Harpsichord 


P MOZART Sonatas in F, G, A. 
ere BACH Sonatas in A, C Minor 
First of a series of 3 concerts Nov. ft, 8 15 
Single admission: $1.50 and $1.80, incl. tax 
Subscription: $3.60 and $4.80, incl. tax 
THERESA L. KAUFMANN AUDITORIUM 
Y.M.H.A,, Lox. Ave. at 92d, N.¥.28. AT.9-2400 





EMPIRE cae” 


RAIN: Re 
trains from Penna. aed 
Flatbush Avenue, 
BY SUBWAY 
mue Subways 
tion Jamaica, 

wn 





EXTRA MAT. Nov. 7th 


‘MATINEE. TODA 


cat PRB OBE Ro 
ARE YOU ENGAGED TO BE DIVORCED OR ENGAGED TO BE MARRIED? 
Ses 


Miriam HOPKINS 
=. Victor JORY ; 


BARRYM W. 47th St. Mats. TODAY, SAT. & 
are TUES. or DAY) Seats 9 weeks 


out: Nov. 1, 7, 13, 14, 16, 21, 29, Dec. & 


MAT. ELECTION DAY: * 


GATHA CHRISTIE'S 
Mystery Comedy 


LITTLE INDIANS 


WAT, TODAY 


EXTRA PERFORMANCE _NEXT SUNDAY EVG 


2” YEAR — still the hoppies? comedy in town! 


{55 nd TELL 


_\ BILTMORE 
F, =~ 


& Sat. 2:40 - 
Eves. at 8:40 
REGULAR PRICES 


HEA 
“yy 
i 


BROADHURST w 


Procee tors 


47th W. of B'way 


ov wlt'se3 MATINEE TODAY 


MATINEE TODAY 


~~ GERTRUDE NIESEN aj 
, b FOLLOW THE GIRLS Be 


“44th ST. THEATRE W. of B°WAY 

uGHSs" . 4% 

Bi packets WITH LA en =PLYMOUTH wi, “i's. 
PAUL SMALL presents HILARIOUSLY FUNNY VARIETY #EVUE! 


CONNEE BENNY TONY & SALLY 


A dX\\ 
—_— 


~ MAT. TODAY at 2:40 * Special Mat. Election Day 


BROADWAY'S COMEDY RIOT 


CHICKEN EVERY SUN 





s 


HOLTZ-BOSWELL-FIELDS DeMARCO 


Sega STAR TIME ea 
CARMEN JONES 


and SUNDAY at 3: co * dell 
Billy Rose presents MATINEE foe aid 
by Oscar Hammerstein 24 Staged by Hassard Short 


“Farand 
away the 
_ piey 


res 
44sea- 
son 


—BARNES, 
Herald Tribune 


FULTON W. 46 St 


oy 


~ FIRST MAT. TODAY 2:40 


A lively melodrama, with much suspense 


’ 773" 
0 WAY O U" 
New Piay by OWEN — 
Seaton 8:40. Mats. Toda & Sa 


| cORT Theatre, 44 E. of Bway 

MA OX TT OM A. AL #IT 
E M ELECTION DAY and | 
xtra atinees THANKSGIVING DAY | K. sic 


-AHOMA! 
JOHN WILOBERG presents | Book _& Lyrics 


by RICHARD ROOGE 
HARRY WAGSTAFF GRIBBLE’S PRODUCTION | Directed by ROUBEN MAMOULIAN 


» OSCAR sRemanerei® 2a 
} Dances by AGNES de MILLE 
C | Y HARRY JOSEPH EVELYN 
A N, NA, LU CAS T A 


DE STOCKWELL nats, Tom's & Bet. 
MANSFIELD Theatre, 47 St. West of B’way JAMES Thea. W 44 St ats. Tom’ 
8:40. Matinees TODAY & SAT. 2:40 


we MARY MARTIN 
—Time T JOHN BOLES 
ER GIR L One TOUCH 
CELESTE MARGARET 


OF VENUS 
JOAN DAVID. 146th ST. THEATRE. 
HOLM 


West of Broadway 
DOUGLASS McCRACKEN BROOKS Eves. & 3) Mate “TODAY SAT. & Nov. 7th 
DOOLEY MABEL ease cs - 


=> Seats Tooay 
All ERRO 
SHUBERT THEATRE, W. 44 St, Cl. 6.5990 Opens Tues., Nov. / wait orsers Now 


Evos.8:30—Mon.thru Thur.$1.20 to 5:40:F ri. & Sats R. H. BURNSIDE presente 
$1.20 to $6. T $6. Tax Incl. Mats. Today and Sat. 2: 30! REGINALD DeKUVEN’S Romantic Comic Opera 


& SAT. at 2:40 
Evgs. Incl. Sun. 


‘GREAT ENTERTAINMENT’—Morehouse, Sun| ” 


ANGEL STREETIN 


Ceci! Humphreys, Viola Keats. Brent Sargent 
Staged by SHEPARD TRAUBE 34 YEA 
BLIOU THEATRE, W. 45th St 


MATINEE TODAY 


fay 2 


BR 9- 046 


BETT 
GARD 
ST 


I ik 


B “A ROARING HIT!" 


)LOOMER GI 





8 stonians 


5 to $72.40 








“A NEW HIT . rough and ready 
comedy, chock bined of honesty 
and laughter.”"—Barnes, Her 

N F U A GEORGE ABBOTT 
RODUCTION 

By LOUIS SOLOMON &. WAROLO BUCHMAN 

| HUDSON Thea., 44 St of Bway. Eve 8 40 


M ATINE E TODAY 


“Smash Hit, distinguished pity."’—Mareh of Time 
ROSE FRANKEN'S Comedy Hit 


SOLDIER'S WIFE 


lwith MARTHA SCOTT._MY RON MeCORMICK 
| GOLDEN, W.45. Evgs.8:40. Mates. Todayd Sat.2-40 
Sailing n Weeks io Advance 


N He O O D 
CARMEN JONES |ROBIN TOO 
e ‘ame = 
a runes gley bed on Bia vera ‘armen |ogNt grtsitno sath. Three Sr at 
Eves. 8:30 BES) SEATS—S$3 plus tax wel eeeeeee a way, Nev. 9 Ag BA 
MATS TODAY & — SAT.—2 30—82 pilus tax ADELPHI Thea + St E. of 7th. Ne Perts Mon 
2 MAR SHER on eet “4th Longe fl COMEDY WIT’. Rows 
M A AT'S FOR BRIDES 
CATHERINE WAS. GREAT DCHOOK, te aaies 
Directed by ROY HARGRAVE | AMBASSADOR Thesa., 49th w of Pt 
ROYALE, 45 St. W. of B'way. CI. 5-5160| Evgs. Incl. Sunday 5:40. Mats. Sal & Stee 
Every Evp. (Exe. Mon.) 0:40. Mate. Saf. & Sun. 2:40) 60, Mat oréers tow, Bvt Sant Soe.tt 2 40. a Higher 
NOV. 7 
MATINEE TODAY ‘ves 2's: 40 | Opens TOM’ W EVG. at 8:40 
“CROWDED WITH LAUGHS.’ os 
-—WALTER WINC ELL Richard W Gyebens, = ——- 
"STH HILARIOUS MONTH! with TINE TORD ~ 
CHICKEN "EVERY SUNDAY PAUL! 
with SIDNEY BLACKMER — LOIS witson | Sy EFEP MY PRETTY ONE 
PLYMOUTH Thea., W. 45th St. CI. 6-9156|"L-)Tity ny Charlele & Oliver H. P. Garrett 
THE THEATRE “GU ILD presents with 8 ee 
ETHEL BARRYMORE | praynouse. satn St. fof 8 vay, BR. 9-3585 
EMBEZZLED HEAVEN | oirnttotithin sect wisi isc uat'st 33 
anLerAy Metietewnitaenuge™ | MATINEE TODAY “aia 
NATIONAL Thea... 4ist West of Broadway) 
EVGS. &:20. MATS. TOM'’W and SAT. 2:30 
MATINEE TODAY } a 36 orere| 
GERTRUDE NIESEN “| 
FOLLOW THE, GIRLS|~ 





Buster ‘Yest—Irina Baronova—Tim Herbert | 








MATINER TODAY AT tt 


i"One eof Broadway's bicgcest hits 
| Edwin Lester presents The New Operetta amon 


Tr 








44th ST. THEATRE, W. of B’way. LA. 4-4337 
Out-of-town Mail Orders Given Prompt Attention | 
Opens TONIGHT 8:40 Sharp} 
VE 
A Al RV. by MARY CHASE 
with JOSEPHINE HULL 
Directed by ANTOINETTE PERRY 
Oo'g Night $1.20 to $4.80. Eves. thereafter 
$1.20, $1.80, $2.40, $3.00, $3.60, $4.20. Tax inel 
Mats. Wed. & Sat. $1.20 to $3.00. Mai! Orders Filled Last 5 Times! 1 
MATINEE TODAY 2:40. 
HATS OFF TO ICE, 
75¢. $1.25 and $1.65 Tax?) 
Saturday Eves. Only: 75e to $2.40, Plus Tax) 
Eves. 8:40, Sun. 8:15 


BROCK PEMBERTON presents | C!. 6-6740. Seats 
Ha 
Settings by John Root 
“Dazzling . . . gorgeous. Brown, Sun 
Ne Monday Perf.) 
Mats Today, Sat. 2:40; Sun, 3 


FRANK FAY™ 
48th ST. THEATRE, E. of Bway. 
Sonja Henle & Arthur M. Wirts present | 
CENTER THEA., MOO. $.5478 


Rockefeller Center co. 5 5474] 
RODGERS and HAMMERSTEIN present! 


Mady CHRISTIANS °*" HOMOLKA 


| REMEMBER, MAMA 


“Mama's Bank Account’’ 
with JOAN THRIZEL 

MUSIC BOX, 45 St. W of B'way. Eves. 8°55 Share | 

Matinees TOM’ wi SAT., 2:35 Sharp! 
THE THEATRE GUILD presents 

with Jack H. Skirball) 


ACOBOWSKY *%° COLONEL, 


The F RANZ WERFEL-S.N.BEHRMANCOMEDY 
Staged by ELIA KAZAN 

LOUIS CALHERN—OSCAR KARLWEIS 
MARIANNE STEWART 


MARTIN BECK Thea. W.45 St. Mats. Tom'w& Sat. 


MATINEE TODAY “azvo 











ONG OF NORWAY 
BR. 924568 | Oe eee ees oiere mats. TodeyOSet.2-30 
$2 sohe menes 
Jan KIEPURA MartaEGGERTH * 
‘THE MERRY WIDOW 
Directed by FELIX BRENTANO 
Y¥. CITY CENTER, Mayor ae ~—. 
tis Oe at ee, Sees eats 
MATINEE TOGIAY ‘aeix aoas 
CHERYL CRAWFORD poresents 
MIRIAM HOPKINS 
VIC TC IR je RY 
THE PERFECT. MARRIAGE 
‘wAahde Thea 4tth w ot 8 way 
venues yp tATINEE, TODAY 
CORNELIA Ofis DENNIS tig 
SKINNER KING DIGGES 
THE SEARCHING WIND 
FULTON, W.46. Evs.8:40. Mat. Today&Sat 240 
MATINFE TODAY Si4°."s0° 
vane } *“BERGNER I8 mage — 
ELISABETH BERGNER ™ 
KISS AND TELL THE TWO MRS. CAROLS 
BILTMORE Thea., : Thea., 47 47 St w. of B" of Bway. eee : scot — ee SS outhe 
MATINEE ° TODAY “eves. = _, TORS AS THRILLER -DILLER:™ 
5th Year! “sear ivson. Times| VIieltrToaR” 
LIFE. WITH FATHER | THEW ISLTOR,, 
ARTHUR MARGETSON & NYDIA WESTMAN | tvgs.8: 40—$! .20 to $3 60. Mats. TOM’ w ae 2 2 — 
EMPIRE The Theatre, B'way & 40th St. PE. 6-9540 | ALFRED de LIAGRS Jr. presents 
1, Co feall SULLAVAN NUC ENT 
M EE adaat Wwartrees i— T c rOHN CTL <1 LE 
rents MEMS TR Mee ESte| | HEVOICE OF THE TURTI 
MATINEE TODAY at 2:30) noresee! Sint ibayny Sin* Ss 
Criticg? Award aL, TODD oeetents| You laughed with “Violet” in REDBOOK: 
BOBBY CLARK in the Musical Hit . 
HAYRIDE|V 1 OLE T tom 
with HARV TrEL. PA 
STEPHENS CLAIRE HITCHCOCK 
eR tren ee tote oo an Ton as Se: He} 


Staged b 
S&S BY 

WINTER GARDEN, Bw 
Eves. 8:30, Mats, TO 


& 50th St. tt. 7. 
AY & SAT. 





20 L + 


NOVOTNA SOLOIST 


AT CZECH CONCERT 


Walter Conducts Section of 
Philharmonic in Brilliant 
Carnegie Hall Program 


By OLIN DOWNES 

The twenty-sixth anniversary of 
the Czechoslovak Republic was 
celebrated by the American 
Friends of Czechoslovakia last 
night in Carnegie Hall by a con- 
cert of Czech music, with Jarmila 
Novotna soloist eighty- 


as and 


eight players of the Philharmonic-| 


Symphony Orchestra conducted by 
Bruno Walter 

The interesting program was 
highly appropriate to the occasion, 
and it emphasized the 
tively small knowledge of the 
Czechoslovak orchestral repertory 
in America. 

Thus the neglected, naive, and 
very charming G major symphony, 
his Fourth, of Antonin Dvorak. 
This symphony has its passages 
of conventionality and platitude, 
but the sum and flavor of it is a 
charming work in the folk-vein, so 
fresh in its feeling and this spring- 
tide of emotion that the 
ness of its creation takes the lis- 
tener in its current and 
him too 


There were various compositions |} 

little known over-| 
which | 
though somewhat | 


of Smetana, the 
ture to his opera 
is heroic in vein, 
bombastic in pronouncement; en-| 
tertaining arias from three of his 
operas, “The Bartered.Bride,” “The 
Kiss” and “Two Widows,” for Mme 
Novotna, and the ever glorious 
tone-poem “Vitava.” Then there 
Was a score by Viteslav Novak 
the symphonic poem “In the Tatra 
Mountains,”’ which, we believe, has 
not been heard in this city since 
1919 


“Libuse,”’ 


Dramatic Landscape 


The Tatras are the mountains 
that lie between Czechoslovakia 
and Poland, where Czechoslovak 
patriots are now fighting grimly 
for the liberation of their land 
The work is conceived as some- 
thing in the nature of dramatic 
landscape—the clouded heights, the 
breaking of the storm, the clear- 
ing of the tempest, the evening 
sky and setting sun 

More, of course, 
into all this; more 
scape, or 


be 
a 


may read 


than 


essence that informs the _ tone- 


poems of Smetana; and in the case} 
a Slovak | 


of the symphonic poem, 
theme used as a principal element 
of the musical structure 
Little of Novak's music 
known here. He lives now in Czech- 
oslovakia, 74 years old, apparently 
with the same independence that 
he has shown as a composer. 
least 
latest scores. The one 
night is 37 years old. 
admitted that it is not very orig- 
inal and that it is loaded down 
with Wagnerisms. But it makes 
a brave sound, and in the poetical 
introduction and conclusion there 
are passages of more than 
orchestral brilliancy. And Mr. 
Walter made much of this music. 


Brilliant Conducting 


The performances were of a high 
order No other conductor ap 
proaches music of the folk nature 
with the ardent enthusiasm and 
what one would call the “fellow- 
simplicity” of Bruno Walten He 
did, in fact, conduct throughout, in 
the shopworn and now tiresome 
phrase, “con amore His heart 
was in every measure. Sometimes 
he was careless of detail and also 
of tone quality, in the rough- 
ness of certain climaxes and occa- 
sional harshness of brass 3ut the 
the conception, permeated 
and they were 


is 


AS 


emotion, 
everything he did, 
compelling 

Mme. Novotna was aiso fortu- 
nate in the simplicity, the winning 
sincerity and taste, and commend- 
able vocal quality of her first two 
airs. The last one, more in the 
bravura vein, found her neither 
technically nor tonally at such ad- 
vantage. She sang an encore with 
Mr. Walter accompanying her at 
the piano, and thereby added to the 
pleasure and entertainment of a 
brilliant evening. The hall was 
packed. There was more than one 
reason, in the occasion itself and 
what it symbolized, for the audi- 
ences rejoicing 


TWO BALLETS PERFORM 


‘Dark Elegies’ at Metropolitan— 
‘Sebastian’ at International 


The Ballet Theatre returned to 
the Metropolitan Opera House last 
night after having omitted its per- 
scheduled for Monday 
fill engagement in 
The contained 
season's only presentation of 
Tudor’s “Dark Elegies,” 
along with repetitions “Waltz 
Academy,” the deux from 
“Don Quixote,” 


Ball.” 
At the International Theatre at 


Columbus Circle the new Ballet In- 
ternational gave its second per- 


formance 
night to 
Newark 

the 
Antony 


an 
program 


of 
pas de 
and “Graduation 


formance and introduced the first) 


work by Edward 


choreographic 
with music by 


Caton, “Sebastian,” 
Gian-Carlo Menotti and a setting 
by Oliver Smith. Also on the bill 
were William Dollar's “Constan- 
tia” (formerly called “Concerto” 
when it was produced by the 
American Zallet), and 
Lake.” These works will 
viewed in THE NEW YORK 
at a later date. 


be re- 
TIMES 


Hazel Griggs at Town Hall 

Hazel Griggs, American pianist, 
was heard in recital at Town Hall 
presenting a 
Bu- 
Zach 


yesterday afternoon, 
program which ranged from 
soni transcriptions of three 
works to a performance of three 
Polytonal Studies of Arthur Far- 
well, tw~> of which were heard for 
the first time in New York. Other 
works on the program included 
Beethoven's Sonata, Op. 81a, “Les 
Adieux’ Schumann's “Etudes 
Symphoniques,’ Ravel's “Sona- 
tine,” Griffes’ “The Lake at Eve- 
ning” and David Guion’s “Ar- 
kansas Traveler.’ 


Other Amusement News Page 19 


compara- | 


JOyYOUS- | 


moves | 


land-| 
piece of programmatic} 
tone-pointing—more of the heroic} 
|is back, and that fact indeed sup- 


jtalents do not match those of 
Derived from Franz} 
and} 
Guild, | 


At} 
we are told this of Novak’s| 
heard last} 
It must be} 
| best theatre 


mere | 


| sentative 


“Swan | 


}fourth operalogue of the 
}11 
| House 


AMUSEMENTS 


THE 


IN THE PLAY: 


and you failed. Nou 


coum you 


Albert Basserman to Ethel Barrymore, 


ST a HEAVE} 
hree acts, by L. 
Helen Fas based on & 
Staged by B Iden 
by Stewart Chaney 
Guild. At the Bb 


Zdenka 

(et ge 

Jarmila 

Franziska 

mall Carrie 

M Schultz 

Pas 

Kovalsky 

Pr¢ sanitz e 

jm) 

Masha 

ottomaestro 

Kompert 

Monsignore 

Maestro Di Camere 

The Pope 

Papa Valet 

Physican 

Swiss Guards. .Paige Edwards 

Sediaris David Barnaby 
Pilgrims, Papal Retinue 


LEWIS NICHOLS 
Barrymore has been ab- 
Broadway for too long 


By 
Ethel 


sent from 


a time, as for the past several sea-| 


sons she has conducted Miss Mof- 


fat’s classroom across the country | 


in “The Corn Is Green.’ Now she 


plies good news. If this morning's 
note could stop there, 
well. Unfortunately 
however, for the 
head of the 
arrived at the National last 

ning is far from a good one; 


it cannot, 


eve- 


leading lady. 
Werfel’s “Embezzled Heaven,”’ 
staged impressively by the 
it still lacks the substance of the 

oe 
“Embezzled 


i 
Heaven” 


faith and love, and not by plan 
chief character is a Czech cook, 
who sends money to her nephew in 
the belief that he will study 
the priesthood, 
to salvation will 
“private priest.” 
who ends as the 
carnival, at the same time 
the cook he has become a 
priest. She goes to live with 
is befriended by the real 


be paved 
He is a swindler 
fortune 


is told the truth of a hope of sal- 
vation by the Pope. She 
he end of the audience 
“Embezzled Heaven” 
and its action is slight 
must depend on 
In making the adap 
tation, L. Bush-Fekete and Mary 
Helen Fay seem to have been a 
little indecisive about shaping the 
figures. As they have 
part of Teta, the cook, they 
not managed to combine the 
sides of her character 


dies 


of 
its 
the 


is a play 
mood 
fulfillment 
characters 


two 


of great faith. In truth, Miss Bar- 


rymore has not managed this en-| 


tirely, either. A fair number of 
the characters lack flesh-and-blood 
reality, and a number of them 
notably the dishonest nephew—are 
almost in caricature. The play's 
ending—the death scene of Teta 
is maudiin in the theatre's worst 
way 
The 
grimage 


could have been a pil 
whereby Teta—as repre- 
of simple faith every- 
learned her lesson of salva- 
tion. But where it should sing, it 
sometimes plods. Where its cha- 
racters should be human ones, they 
often are simply the product of an 
adaptor’s art. Although because of 
the theme they could be more uni- 
versal than those of Mr. Werfel’'s 
“Jacobowsky and the Colonel,” 
Teta and the others are not nearly 
as real. “Embezzled Heaven” ends 
with giving the feeling of great 
promises but little actual reward 
2 ss 

Although Miss Barrymore al- 
ways is brilliant on any stage, 
Teta is not the part by which she 
will be most remembered. To act 
Teta completely probably would 
be impossible, and there may be 


play 


where 


MUSIC NOTES 


Tonight’s events: Maxim Scha- 
piro, piano recital, Town Hall, 8:30 
o'clock recital by Alexander 
Schneider, violin, and Ralph Kirk 
patrick, harpsichord, Lexington} 
Avenue Y.M.H.A., 8:40; recital of| 


American folksongs by Tom Scott, | 


MeMiilin Columbia Uni- 


versity, 8 


Theatre, 
30 
Carol Longone will give her 


A. M. today in Hampshire 
She will talk on Borodin’'s 
“Prince Igor.” 

An 
musicians 


autumn concert by blind 
before an audience of 
blind people will take place at The 
Lighthouse, 111 East Fifty-ninth 
Street, tonight at 8:15 


Morel to Conduct at City Center 


More! has arrived here by 
air from Uruguay at Mayor La 
Guardia’s invitation to conduct 
several operas during the fall sea- 
the New York City Center 
Company which begins on 
Thursday of next week He will 
the podium with Laszlo Ha- 
artistic and musical director 
of the opera company. 


Jean 


son of 
Opera 


share 


lasz 


“You tried to buy a mediator with earthly 


*| the role with dignity and sincerity. 


1, Countess 


all would be} 


play in which the} 
theatre's royal family} 


its | 
the | 


teaches | 
that heaven is arrived at through | 
Its | 


for 
and thus her way| 
by a} 


teller in a} 
telling | 
village | 
him, } 
priest, | 
and during a pilgrimage to Rome| 


at | 


created the} 
have} 


—the schemer | 
|for heaven and the simple woman 


season at} 
| 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 


PLAY BUSCH AND SERKIN 
| PLAY AT TOWN HALL 


Starts 


TOMORROW 


Manhattan 
ALHAMBRA 
COLISEUM 
8lst ST. 
Béth ST 
58th ST. 
HAMILTON 
125th ST 
REGENT 
RIVERSIDE 
23d ST 
Bronx 
CASTLE HILL 
CHESTER 
FORDHAM 
FRANKLIN 
MARBLE HILL 
PELHAM 
ROYAL 
Westchester 
MT. VERNON 


——_NEW ROCH 
TODAY at 
above thealres 
—— Ee 
Except of 


JS ACTS 
VAUDEVILLE 
TONITE at 
FRANKLIN 

| BUSHWICK 


‘Recital by Violinist, Pianist 
| Opening Endowment Series 


Thrills Large Audience 


load 





violinist, and Ru- 
\dolf Serkin, pianist, gave a recital 
jlast night, which opened the fif- | 
teenth annual Town Hall Endow- 
iment Series. They played the Bee- 
ithoven sonata in C minor, Opus 
30, No, 2; the Brahms sonata in 
G major, Opus 78, and the Schu- 
\bert Fantasy in C major, Opus 159. 
| After hearing Mr. Serkin in this 
|program it was possible for one to 
understand, without necessarily 
agreeing with it, the verdict of 
those critics who declare him to be | 
lthe best of all the pianists of the | 
day. It also was possible to under- | 
istand the high repute of the en- | 
semble playing of this pair. 

For the interpretations not only 
|were in the best tradition, but, 


|thanks largely to Mr. Serkin’s 
electric handling of his instrument, 
they were dramatic, vibrant and 
living expressions of the spirit. 

The opening Beethoven work was 
a triumph for Mr. Serkin. His 
|basic tone and his tone colorings 

’jand shadings, as well as the ex- 
Love. |traordinary clarity and the perfec- 
“Embezzled Heaven.” |tion and smoothness of his tech- 
Vandamm |Mique, particularly in the finale, 

_,jallegro, made the performance a 

imasterpiece of pianism. 

There was much more imagina- 
tion here in the piano than in the 
or Scheming|violin, but in the Brahms sonata 

that side of Teta|Mr. Busch began to emerge, espe- 
trying bribery’ into|cially in the richly beautiful ada- | 
heaven. Making his first appear-|gio, and in the closing Schubert | 
lance on the Broadway stage, Al-|Fantasy this excellent violinist | 
bert Basserman has the role of the|seemed at last in the vein and did | 

Pope. His accent is a little diffi-|really fine work throughout. 
cult, and he has one or two con- And here the pianist seemed to | 
tinental mannerisms, but he playsj;outdo himself, with a combina- 
tion of brilliance and taste which, 
cduard|with the ensemble interpretation, 

their} made the performance one not like- 
parts a bit too brightly; Martin/ly soon to be forgotten by anyone 
Blaine is good as the village priest,)who heard it. The enthusiasm of 
and Bettina Cerf as the|the large audience was so great 
for whom Teta works.| that the artists had to come back 
Chaney has provided|foe many bows at the conclusion | 

lavish settings ‘of the concert. 


Adolph Busch, 


81 ST & RIVERSIDE 


ALDEN 
M COLUMBIA 
y Newane es LAURA’ Gene TIERNEY * 


yo 


tcor ALBEE 


fulton & Delelb Bhiyn 


rmes | ODAY }1),.,, 


‘CASAN 


Bway & 62nd St 
0008S OFTN 11 304m 


AFTS 


. 


have the purchase price. 
in 





whether Miss 
simple enough | 


to 
is quite 
cook, 


a question as 
Barrymore 
for the aging 
}enough for 
which gs 





Meisner and 
Franz tend to go through 


Sanford 
so is 


Stewart 
completely 





STARTS WED. NOV.! r 


ST. GEORGE, Stolen Islond 
CAPITOL, Posse 
HUNTERDON, flew 
STARTS FRI. NOV. 3 
ST. JAMES, Asbury Park 


SUN. NOV. 5, COURT SQUARE, Newlon 





PARAMOUNT 


HUNTINGTON 





all over the Globe 


Fitugeraié- 
et greet at 
he wee in 


"Going My Wey” 





WILLIAM 





y/ 
_ Beulah Bondi- Barry Fitzgerald ... 


WALTER SANDE + MARY TREEN + ANN DORAN 


a NRK SHORE no 


Sn Dwecied by MARK SANDRICH 
Writer by Alien Scot 


“A gripping study) ‘*Preserves the lyrie quality of Pushkin's 
in haunted frenzy!’’| throbbing overtones ae played 


3B w«! 
—TELEGRAM| by Pierre Bianchar!’’ RIBUNE a 
PIERRE BLANCHAR v&’PUSHKIN’S : 


Bizorre and 
splendid... 
georgeously set « 
brillently acted / 


~ POST 


RIVOLI 


Bway ot 49th S 


¢$ DOORS OPEN 9:30 A.M 


= 
<4. ‘GENE TIERNEY 
4 He\, DANA ANDREWS 


CLIFTON WEBB 


be 
AVE. 


o~ PIQUE-DAME 


ATI2™STREET (tA OAmME O€ Pique) IN FRENCH-ENGLISH TITLES 


Pe 


PLAYHOUSE 
EASTof a AVE. 


Paramount 


“Best French Film in Years—Don't Miss It!” —POST 


32 RUE MONTMARTRE 


“Seasoned with spicy Gallic wit and satire 
. . excellently played!’’—CUE 


VIVE LA FRANCES 


— with — 
VON STROHEIM 
g eyes SIMON 
letvine POPESCO 
* GABY MORLAY Pius the Feature 
LUCIEN BAROUX Travetegue— 
DOORS OPEN 10.30 AM. « 7th Ave. & Sotn St 


ARMY AT WAR ART EXHIBITION + On Mezzanine Floor + Entrance to Exhibition only (without admission charge) 153 West SOth St. | 


49th ST. on BROADWAY ==> 60th ST. on MADISON AVE. 


x7 COMPLETE CAPTURE of AACHEN 


FIRST LARGE GERMAN CITY TAKEN BY U. 8. 
DEWEY PLEDGES HONESTY IN CHICAGO SPEECH 
Pictures Just Released Show Fall of Corregidor 


Sind ST. on LEXINGTON AVE. “on MADI 


TODAY AT 12:25, 2:20, 4:15, 6:10, 8054 10 TODAY AT 12:15, 2:12, 4:09, 6:06, 8:03 416 


JOURNEY for MARGARET || Presenting LILY MARS 


MARGARET O'BRIEN, ROBERT YOUNG JUDY GARLAND, VAN HEFLIN 


“nbow, 
BRACKEN 


010 or 
- Gilt LAMB 
Loew's CRITERION [5°"5 


‘« PARAMOUNT 


“TILL WE MEET AGAIN” 
“YOU CAN'T RATION LOVE” 


“HALFWAY TO HEAVEN” 


“39 STEPS” WILL BE WITHDRAWN | 
AFTER COMPLETION OF THIS RUN! 


2. OF ALFRED HITCHCOCK S OREATEST. 


Dorothy 


LAMOUR 
Eddve 





M-G-M's 
TECHNICOLOSSALI 


RONALD COLMAN 
KISMET 


MARLENE DIETRICH” 


and Cast of Thousands 
tith RECORD BREAKING WEEK! 


ASTOR HIT! 


B'way al 45th St. 
Continuous * Popular Prices « Doors Open TOAM 
Midnight Show Every Night 


BCT Oms 1th 
CONT THOM (PM | 


Lint CARNEGIE: W57sr. 


PRESTON STURGES’ 
- Han. THE a 
ST, (/ONQUERING RO 
Ne bth Ave 


11:40, 3:40, 5:40,7:40,9:55P.M 


GEORGE SANDERS in | 
“PARIS AFTER SARK” 
at 1:45, 3:50, 5:50, 7:55, 10 P.m.| & 
Yon WILSON 


host UTy 


TECHNIC Or . 


> 


Hlatbwsn 
B OeKole 


= LEE : CHARLES 
ARTHUR * BOWMAN * COBURN 
“THE IMPATIENT YEARS” 
“EVER SINCE VENBS” 


Begin 
E.SihST 


| i 


CINEMA 
Tae 


Tn oA 
as Martha Scott 


CHEERS FOR MISS BISHOP 
Leslie Howard Mi STER y 


Abbe OtYELL 
IN SOCIETY 


Evelyn ANKER 


SAVOY 


Mth St opp. Macy's 


ASTOR? 


Flatbush & Church w 


ct “THE GREATEST" NY Post 


DARRYL F. TANUCH'S 


W ¥ N 
a WILSO! 


4] Shown at 12:55, 3:45, 6:31, 9:20 P.M. 


| SCHUYL WAYNE MORRIS 


| Wcoumsusave-soer § PRISCILLA LANE 
| |EDW. GROBINSON- 1/G£R SHARK 





Michele Morgan, Barry Fitzgerald 


4 TWO TICKETS 10 LONDON) 
GEORGE WASHINGTON 
SLEPT HERE Jack BENNY 


Chas. COBURN 


3d AVE. 


M dhs Cage 
AT 100 3:15-5.30- 750: 10:05 Pm ALS 8790 


“TOPS IN HILARITY” 


GRANT 


0 ARSENIC 
“OLD LACE’ 


A WARNER BROS HIT with 


RAYMOND MASSEY * JACK CARSON 
PRISCILLA LANE * PETER LORRE 


“JOHNNY DOESN'T 
LIVE HERE ANYMORE’ 


SIMONE SIMON « JAMES ELLISON 
‘DEAD MAN'S EYES’ & 


‘GREENWICH VILLAGE’ & ‘DANGEROUS JOURNEY’ 


ORPHEUM & STRAND ‘WING and o PRAYER’ & ‘MOONLIGHT and CACTUS’ 
‘BRIDE BY MISTAKE’ Laraine Day & ‘SEVEN DOORS TO DEATH’ 


STATE, New Brunswick 


RIVOLI, Poters 
STATE, Jersey City 


HELEN 


BENDIX * ty ser er 


~| Shown at 1:10, 


ELGIN 


1944. 


way YOu® Paet 
for victory 


Buy Bonds 
Now! 


Westchester 
WH. PLAINS 
YONKERS 
Brooklyn 
BUSHWICK 
DYKER 
GREENPOINT 
KENMORE 
MADISON 
ORPHEUM 
PROSPECT 
REPUBLIC 
TILYOU 
Coney Island 
Queens 
ALDEN 
Jamaica 
Keith's 
FLUSHING 
Keith's 
RICH. HILL 
STRAND 
Far Rockaway 


‘SHADOW OF SUSPICION’ 


Mirror 


CARY 


FRANK CAPRA'S 


and 


. | Eddie BRACKEN ‘Heil the Conquering Here’ & Jock HALEY Toke ” te 


Gane ANDREWS s WAC. WAVE ond a 7 MARINE 


me COOPER with terese WRIGHT | 


OVA BROWN’ 


COLONIAL = WILSON:=] | 


be (Chvldven 40c) * EVES $1.10 (Children 55c) 2nd Balcony 76 mei. Tax 


* 
— Extra! On Stage! — 


IN PERSON 
HILDEGARDE CUNOW 


An Actual Victim of Naz: Abuse! 


NOT A HOLLYWOOD ACTRESS, BUT A 
GERMAN GIRL HERE TO TELL WITH HER 
OWN LIPS THE ABUSE SHE SUFFERED! 


EDWARD A. GOLDEN 


Production with 
GEORGE COULOURIS 
STANLEY RIDGES + MORRIS CARNOVSKY 
OSA MASSEN-GAVIN MUIR 
Produced by ROBERT GOLDEN Directed by HERBERT }. BIBERMAN 


R a 
‘PALACE 
0 

MIDNITE SHOW EVERY NITE 


BIG 200 CITY EASTERN PREMIERE OF ‘THE MASTER RACE’ 
METROPOLITAN AREA INCLUDES 


———~ STARTS THURS. NOV. 


B'WAY 
& 
47 $1. 


y eee, 

STRATFORD, Poughteepwe 

CLINTON, Clinton Pont 

FRANKLIN, fronklin 

STRAND, Hackettstown 

Huntington MAJESTIC, Perth Amboy 
LAKEWOOD, lokewood 


Middletown 


a” 


: AND THROUGHOUT 
NEW ENGLAND, NEW YORK STATE and sed bent 


“Giggles and guffaws were heard 


... film is really 


funny.’ -WORLD-TELEGRAM 


PRODUCED 
FOR LAFFS 


*, 


/ sy 
EDWARD SMALL 


“Will cake your breath away ee 
Joan Arturo 
ontaine-deCordova 


‘FRENCHMANS 


CREEK 


a MITCHELL LEISEN prooucrion 
's TECHNICOLOR Sensation 4 





ON THE STAGE 


HAZEL SCOTT 
JACKIE MILES ,~ ) 


HARRISON A FISHER" 
EXTRA ATTRACTION! 


RO WS JERRY == 


HUMPHREY BOGART 


in ERNEST HEMINGWAY'S 


To HAVE anp HAVE Nor’ 


WALTER BRENNAN - LAUREN BACALL 
AFTER MIONIGHT SHOW AT 1215 A. M. 


OPENS 9:15 A.M. sway « arin 


Warners’ STRAND 


HEDY LAMARR |  '™ PERson 
PAUL HENREID| LES 


oz BROWN 


ANDO ORCH 
SYDNEY GREENSTREET 


SUE RYAN 
PETER LORRE 











DANNY DRAYSON 
S 8th STar 5 8th STac MADISON N pi 
PRESTON Sit RES ES’ | 


(ONQUERT 
e a Go NG) 


Eddie BRACKEN « * Ella RAINES 
At\2NOON-2°4-6: 8ancdioPpm 


STARTS TOMORROW — —“WILSON” 
6 th ST. PLAYHOUSE ot Sra Ave. 


Gene TIERNEY Don AMECHE 


HEAVEN CAN WAIT 


im Technicolor 
3:20, 5 30, 7:40, 
GINGER ROGERS 
JOEL McCREA 


PRIMROSE PATH 


& “NORTHWEST RANGERS” 


6*AV.~-19*St 


_ 9:50 P. mt 


‘ater ECT 


AMUSEMENTS 


LO EWS i 


MELD OVER 2nd BIG WEEK! 
DAVID O. SELZNICK’S 


T)| since YOU 
WENT AWAY’ 


KATHARINE COMMODORE 


PARADISE) WEPBURN | (M4 
VALENCIA] TURHAN BEY DELANCEY | 


JAMAICA Ave ‘ss 


Lexington! ‘DRAGON | p | 7x iT N 
at Ste STOTET SEED’ a 


a 
83 STREET plus GALA PROGRAM of | ELEC 1t0 SHORTS 


724 STREET| ‘MY BUDDY'] OLYMPIA | 


‘ twa 


| Donald BARRY 
th 
5 STREET plus ‘SWING in the SADDLE’ 
ORIENTAL 


TRIBORO 
WH. PLAINS 


eroon, ~ 


4th STREET 
ALPINE 
BEDFORD 
F BROADWAY 
GATES 
MELBA 
PREMIER 
wry ne 
AMERICAN SWEETHEART He 
BURLAND) ROBT UVMSTON |W 
BURNSIDE, futH rener 


FMLTONST ORLYW 


Doers Open 


16:30 A.M. Daity bpencip A a GREY) RY > 


| Uncoun sa 





HAIL THE CONQUERING HERO 


stplus “TAKE IT BIG’ — jock tole 
‘GOING TO TOWN’ 


ond “SEVEN DK DEATH 


STURGES 


BOULEVARD 
CONEYIS 
FAIRMOUNT 
KINGS 


MANHATTAN 


42nd STREET 
116th STREET 
INwoOooD 
ORPHEUM 
SHERIDAN 


‘THE 
HAIRY APE’ 


shi 


‘MAISIE 


GOES TO RENO’ 


‘ARE THESE OUR 
PARENTS ?” 


HELEN VINSON | ——————_ 
siur—— | MT VERNON 


‘THE GIRL | NEW ROCH 
‘WHO DARED’| YONKERS. 


ot MELBA- ORIENTAL -ORPHEUM-PITKIN | PREVIEW TONITE 
JOE MARTIN ond AMATEURS ot BEDFORD | at LEXINGTON 


MAnmall an 


VICTORIA 


westcuesten 


DAVID O. SELZNICK 
presents his first production since 


‘Gone With The Wind’ & Rebecca 


SINCE YOU WENT AWAY 


starring 
CLAUDETTE COLBERT -JENNIFER 
JONES- JOSEPH COTTEN-SHIRLEY 
TEMPLE+MONTY WOOLLEY 
LIONEL BARRYMORE 
ROBERT WALKER 


J Lana is luscious as @ 

bewildered bride with 

2 + two men in her life! 
~ 


< Lana TURNER 


in M-G-M's 


Romance 
tn Ferson § 


Radio slove-n-laugh stow! 


*BLIND DATE’ 


starring 


ARLENE FRANCIS 

JOHNNIE JOHNSTON 
BOB STRONG & Orch. 
Extra! Ella Mae MORSE 


- THE GAYEST MUSICAL OF 1944! 


(75 OW TEMA : 
Damon Keryouls 


IRISH EYES 
ARE E SMILING ( 


ROCKEFELL ar 
CENT 


SHOW PLACE 
OF THE NATION 


RADIO CITY MUSIC HALL : 


“Absorbing, thrilling, entertaining.” —mieror 


GREER GARSON - WALTER PIDGEON 


in Metre-Goldwyn-Mayer's 


“MRS. PARKINGTON” 


Edward Arnoid - Agnes Moorehead - Cecil Kellaway 


“AMERICAN RHAPSODY” - Prod 


Corps de Ballet mnho h direct 


ed by le 40% ee 


ON STAGE: 
Club. Rockettes 
DOORS OPEN TODAY AND THURSDAY 945 A.M 
Picture et: 10:10, 1:15, 4:13, 7:11, 10:17 «© Stage Show ot: 12:14, 3:19, & 17, © 26 


FIRST MEZZANINE SEATS RESERVED IN ADVANCE e¢ 


*) Rapee 


Phone Circie 6-4600 


“* Compelling screen drama !’’—News 
**Romantic, eloquent, moving !’’ —Her. Trib. 


VIVIEN ROBERT 


LEIGH - TAYLOR 


in M-G-M’s 


ATERLOO BRIDGE 
REPUBLIC 


THEATER + COlumbus 5-9647 


MIDNITE_ 
SHOWS 


Bway Bet 
Slet & S2ad 


.. towers over current pictures!” 
eres: ARCHER WINSTEN -“Y #0857 


=A THUNDER ROCKIA 


ih ST. © EAST of 71h AVE Cont from 10 OAM 


FRENCH AND 
AMERICAN 


ere! NEMA 00 Bicy 1 Bh Ave — 


@0Tn AEE Y With 4 
COS 9/59 CONTINUOUS -/ PM4 fo MION 


ENGLISH TITLES 


A NAUGHTY a 


Mortimer 
Mirror 


produced, 
.. powerful.’ 


OW = 


4 PRIZE 
FILM rm. 


7th Ave. bee.. 
Sam STANLEY For 4iet . 


i Tree - 


wee] THA LIA EET) 


“No Hitcheock Thriller Is Possessed 
of Greater Suspense 


‘48 HOURS” 


teorsen "WOICE IN THE WIND” 


LEDERER 
Music by Chopin and Smetana 
Nr Les Av 


67. T. GRANDE ®:'s5 Now 


“Superlatively 
dous realism. 


ae" 
Presents 


A NEI os MISE TIMELY FRABLES oF 


alsmes IN IRABLES 


4 BCT Ohh Me 
829 0378 


ROSALIND FRE 
+= RUSSELL Mac MURRAY 
G3. Taxe ALETTER DARLING 


ymca acaca sreey: CLAUDETTE COLBERT 


00M ORSONWETLES 05070 
E: SLOURMEY IN INTO FEAR 


i" 
Be WOOLLEY MDOWALL PER 


ita 
Tomorrow—" WILSON , 


SAMLEY 


Tyrone POWER connie 
Don AMECHE Brian DONLEVT 


IN OLD CHICAGO 


Barbara STANWYCK Joel MceCREA 


Starts 








BANJO ON MY KNEE 
JOSEPH TERESA 
18 ne Thaw COTTEN ° WRIGHT 


GREENWICH 
MARY ASTOR SHADQW OFA DOUBT 
HERBERT MARHALL — ¥ NG IDEA 


dco MADELEINE CARROLL 


ASPY 





475,000* 
copies in print of 
this “compelling and 


compassionate novel.” 
—Chicago News 


EARTH 
AND 
HIGH 

HEAVEN 


by Gwethalyn 
Graham 


“You will read it for its tender 
afd moving love story, its subtle 
afid beautiful prose and for its 
flashing illumination.” 

~ Boston Herald 


“One of the most arresting books 
im many a day.” 
—Philadelphia Inquirer 


‘Brilliant, fearless and ti tg 
-N. Y. ost 


EARTH 
AND 
HIGH 

HEAVEN 


“Her story has charm, romantic ap- 
peal and dramatic force as well as 
‘social significance’. Miss Graham 
is to be congratulated for writing 
so honest and timely a book with 
so much skill. And its fine plea 
for understanding and simple hu- 
manity deserves the widest possible 
audiénce.”=—N. Y. Times 

"Ie is a fine love story, full-bodied, 
contradictory, shadowed and dis- 
tressed, and given uncommon 
emotional subtlety by the war 


intensely real and not soon to be 
forgotten.” —N. Y. Herald Tribune 


“A moving and dramatic novel 
distinguished for its intelligent 
dialogue, its knowledge of human 
beings and its moral incontest- 
ability.”"— Philadelphia Record 


EARTH 
AND 
HIGH 

HEAVEN 


* including The Literary Guild 
$2.50 


J, 8. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 


Philode'phie ° New York 


ART WEBK BEGINS | 
IN NATION TODAY 


Professional League Sponsors | 
12th Annual Observance— 

| 

| | 


} 
Prizes Awarded Here 
| By EDWARD ALDEN JEWELL | 
| The twelfth annual observance| 
jof American Art Week begins to-| 
'day throughout the country. It is! 
lheld un@er the auspices of the} 
[American Artists Professional 
League, Inc., national headquarters 
of which is in Carnegie Hall. There 
are chapters in all of the States. | 
Previously the New York | 
chapter had not arranged large) 
group showings in this city, but a| 
1944 exhibition opened yesterday 
in the second-floor gallery of the! 
Architectural League, 115 East| 
Fortieth Street. Paintings and/| 
sculpture occupy all of the ex-| 
hibition space there. The show is| 
to continue through this week and! 
next. 
Work was admitted Ly a jury| 
composed of Frederic Whitaker} 
(chairman), C. Paul Jennewein,| 
Eloise Egan, Ivan Olinsky and! 
Howard Spencer. The jury of 
award, members of which were 
Charles Keck, Wilford S. Conrow|} 
and Gordon Grant, met yesterday) 
afternoon and distributed prizes 
Thomas J. Watson of the Inter- 
national Business Machines Corpo- 
ration had offered a _ purchase 
prize of $500. This was divided| 
into the first and second prizes for 
the show, awarded respectively as 
follows: $350 to Walter Farndon’s 
oil “The Automat,” and $150 to 
Julian Delbos’ water-color “View} 
of Bar Harbor.” The third prize, a/ 
$106 war bond presented by the} 
New York City chapter of the | 
league, went to M. G. Debonnet for| 
a water-color called “Good Seeds.” | 
The fourth prize ($50 worth of| 
artists’ materials, given by M.) 
Grumbacher & Co.) was awarded) 
by the jury to Constance Curtis 
for her canvas “Woman in Gray.” | 
|A cash award of $100, offered by 
Devoe & Raynolds, constituted the} 
ififth prize, which went to John| 
Scott Williarns’ water-color “Road| 
in Algiers.” The Albert T. Reid 
isilver medal for sculpture (this 
|medal designed by Ulrich Eller- 
jhusen), the sixth prize, was won} 
|by Eleanor M. Mellon’s “Mother| 
jand Child” in terra cotta. 
seventh, the Sidney Hollander $50 
prize for sculpture, was awarded 
to C. Paul Jennewein’s “Iris.” 
There also were honorable men- 
tions, winners of these being three 
sculptors: Katharine Thayer Hob- 
son, Pietro Montana and William 
Rosenthal. 
| As a whole, the exhibition at the 
Architectural League is extremely 
jacademic —- preponderantly so in| 
ithe right-wing category, but con-| 
jtaining a little “modernism,” too, 
that is as a rule reminiscent. There) 
are competently painted canvases 
by well-known artists, which, if! 
generally not remarkable in them- 
selves, add a measure of “‘tone’”’ to 
an ensemble that, on the over- 
crowded walls, looks—well, pretty 
much as a heterogenous academic 
ensemble would be expected to 
look. Here and there a thoroughly 
delightful picture stands out 
The American Artists Profes- 
jsional League, on the other hand 
is an earnest organization with 
serious purposes, and it would be 
a great mistake to judge its utility 
jon the basis just of a local exhibi- 
jtion that in the main misses fire. 
In last Sunday's art columns some 
of the major activities were men- 
tioned. For one thing, this league 
has established what it calls a 
dual fair jury system, calculated 
to provide “a balance in the selec- 
tion of pieces to be included in ex- 
hibitions This system was tried 
out in New Jersey, later in Massa- 
chusetts, and is reported to have 
proved very successful. 
The American Artists 








Profes- 


The! - 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER Il, 1944. 


Books of 


the Times 


By ORVILLE PRESCOTT 


Pacific Ocean where the marines have land- 

ed, fought desperately and gallantly and 
exterminated Japanese garrisons; but there is 
only one that marines mean when they speak 
of “the island.” And that is Guadalcanal. The 
first important land victory won by United States 
forces in this war may have been pretty small 
potatoes compared with what we have since ac- 
complished all around the world. But the grim 
and bloody fighting that took place in the jungles 
of an obscure island previously known even by 
name to few save copra planters and geographers 
was both a psychological and a military turning 
point. There green American troops with little 
naval support, inadequate but superb air sup- 
port, short rations and scanty supplies of all 
kinds mastered a desperate situation. Not only 
the marines feel a deep emotion when they think 
of Guadalcanal; so does the entire American 
public. 

Capt. Herbert Laing Merillat, USMCR, served 
as public relations officer with the First Marine 
Division throughout the entire Guadalcanal cam- 
paign, directing the several combat correspond- 
ents under him, recording each day’s events late 
into each troubled night. He is the author of 
“The Island: A History of the First Marine Divi- 
sion on Guadalcanal August 7-Decemker 9, 
1942.”*" Here for the historians of the future, for 
relatives whose dear ones never rendered them a 
clear account and for the curious is the cold dope. 
This is what happened without any literary trim- 
mings. Because of the nature of Captain Meril- 
lat's duties “The Island” is of necessity a semi- 
official publication, although he insists that he is 
solely responsible for its contents. Nevertheless, 
his book reads like a professional military rec- 
ord intended for the marines themselves, not 


["eaci are plenty of other islands in the 


like a book for the general public, which is ac-, 


customed to more highly colored war reporting. 


A Clear, Precise, Detailed Story 


It thus has both the faults and merits inherent 
in its nature. “The Island” is an almost day-to- 
day chronicle of four months’ fighting. It gives 
a clear, precise, detailed account of the major 
engagements, such as the battle of the Tenaru 
River, where 700 Japanese were slaughtered, one 
surrendered and fourteen were captured, against 
an American loss of twenty-four killed and sev- 
enty-five wounded, and of many skirmishes, 
forays, scouting trips and raids. Captain Meril- 
lat is at great pains to describe the constant 


*THE ISLAND: A History of the Firat Marine Divi- 
sion on Guadalcanal August 7-December 9, 1942. 


By Capt. Herbert L. Merillat, USMCR. 283 pages. 
Houghton Mifflin. $5. 


action, which was at first limited to the defense 
of Henderson Field and which expanded as the 
Japanese forces were driven back and the Amer- 
ican forces increased. He makes many matters 
clear that previous books and dispatches did not. 
He prints many helpful maps, but not enough 
to keep up with the place names he mentions. 

All this material is admirably factual and in- 
formative. Less important details are included 
also: about Oscar, the harmless Japanese sub- 
marine; Louie the Louse, the persistently annoy- 
ing Japanese night spotter plane; about the mys- 
terious phrase “purple nights,” which describes 
nights of general horror when Japanese war- 
ships shelled the American positions and Japa- 
nese bombers raided them. Scores of officers 
and as many enlisted men are mentioned by 
name, identified by their units and given credit 
for their individual feats of bravery and skill. 
An extensive appendix even reprints various cita- 
tions and an alphabetical list of all the officers 
and men who were decorated. 


Emotionai Appeal Lacking 


Captain Merillat has undoubtedly performed a 
useful service in writing “The Island.” But in 
spite of his painstaking care he has not written 
a very good book. Security reasons surely long 
since of no importance have prevented him from 
including much material. For instance, he never 
once tells us how many marines fought at Guadal- 
canal, how many lost their lives and how many 
were wounded. His concentration on the ground 
forces causes him to give scant attention to the 
Navy and not much to the air force. And by 
writing so completely, he has consequently also 
written monotonously. There is small excite- 
ment, little emotion and insufficient general 
atmosphere in “The Island.” 

Guadalcanal was an island of dirt, disease and 
hunger, of blood and mud and fear, of slaughter 
and frustration and triumph, of death and mutila- 
tion. Captain Merillat knows as much, maybe 
more, about such matters as anyone else. But 
his conscientious pages are so dry and flat that 
readers would do well to turn to less militarily 
authoritative writers to find out what it felt like 
to fight on Guadalcanal. The correspondents, 
who were civilian reporters at heart, did a far 
better job of making Guadalcanal vivid in print 
than Captain Merillat, who was a civilian him- 
self once not long ago. Richard Tregaskis’ 
“Guadalcanal Diary,” Ira Wolfert's “Battle for 
the Solomons’ and John Hersey’s “Into the 
Valley” are still among our most effective war 
books. They may be exciting and emotional. 
But they are engrossing. “The Island” is more 
comprehensive and accurate. But it is dull. 


sional League has also sought to} 
bring about the commissioning of| 
American artists for “official” por-) 
traits. It has investigated the 
paint situation and conducted a 
campaign in behalf of providing 
artists with permanent colors.| 
Agitation for the securing of pro-| 
tection in the matter of copyright} 
is under way. Through its many 
State chapters the league essays 


|to bring art closer to the people 


Books Published Today 


CRYING AT THE LOCK, by Adeline 
Rumsey (Simon & Schuster, 
$2.50) * A novel. 

COUNTRY NEIGHBORHOOD, by 
Elizabeth Coatsworth (Mac- 
millan, $2.50). Anecdotes and 
impressions of Maine country 
life. 

DELAWARE’S BURIED PAST, by C. 


| $1,100 FOR PAINE LETTER | 


‘Total in Sale of James McHenry 
Papers Here Is $34,901 


| ‘The second and final part of the, 
| James McHenry papers brought) 
| $15,921 at auction at the Parke-| 
Bernet Galleries yesterday and 


sold last May at the 


Books—Authors 


The Rev. Guy Howard, who is 
52 years old, walks an average of 
4,000 miles a year to minister to 
isolated communities in the Ozarks 
as pastor, teacher and general ad- 
viser. His autobiography, “Walkin’ 
Preacher of the Ozarks,” is full of 
homespun stories of the mountain 
people. Harper will publish it next 
Wednesday, when he is due in New 
York. Another book on the Ozark 
people will be released today by 
the Caxton Printers, Ltd., of Cald-) 
well, Idaho. Called “Pioneers of| 
the Ozarks,” it is a collection of 
|black-and-white portraits and 
sketches in dialect by Lennis| 
Leonard Broadfoot, a native of 
Missouri, who is part Cherokee 
Indian. 


The latest addition to the books 
about Woodrow Wilson is the third 
volume of the memoirs of Josephus 
Daniels, Secretary of the Navy in 
Wilson's Cabinet. Titled “The Wil- 
son Era: Years of Peace—1910- 
1917,” it contains 600 pages and 
numerous photographs and car-| 
toons. The University of North| 
Carolina Press schedules it for 
Nov. 18. 


Events Today 
Luncheon, Overseas Press Club, 110 
|West Fifty-seventh Street, 12:30 P. M.| 


Speakers: Gretta Palmer, Capt. Rey! 
Scott. | 


Luncheon, Mizrachi Women's Or-| 
| ganization of America, Hotel Commo- | 
dore, 1 P. M. Speakers: Mrs. Adolph} 
H. Schreiber, Mrs. Max S. Rosenfeld, | 
'Mrs. Nathan B. Fischer, Rabbi Ben. | 


jamin Morgenstern. 








Conference, Vocational Advisory | 
Service, New York Times Hall, 240 
West Forty-fourth Street, 2 P. M.| 
“What the Government and Private | 
Agencies in New York City Are Do-! 
ing for Ex-Service Men and Soldiers- 
to-Be,’”’ Capt. Wilson Bender, Dr. 
James Garrett, Maj. Charles F. 
Dienst, Robert P. Lane. 

Frick Collection, 1 East Seventieth | 
Street. “Contrasts in Space: The| 
Lorenzetti and Leonardo da Vinci,” | 
Franklin M. Biebel, 3 P. M. | 
' 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Eigh-| 
jty-second Street and Fifth Avenue 
\‘‘Portrait of America,’’ Blanche 
Brown, 3:30 P. M 


Peoples Congress, East and Weat 
Association, Town Hall, 123 West 
Forty-third Street, 5:30 P. M. Speak- 
ers: William Holland, Lin Mousheng, 
Richard J. Walsh, Hubert 8. Liang. 





Dinner, Greater New York Safety 
Council, Hotel Commodore, 6:30 P. M. 
Presentation of awards for outstand- 
ing accomplishment in preventing 
lost-time accidents. 


iand to stimulate sales. 
|has for several years, the league 
istates, enjoyed the endorsement of 


Art Week 


the General Federation of Women’s} 
Clubs. | 
] 
| 


ture. 


These are the league officers: 
National president, F. Ballard Wil- 
liams; national vice president, Al-| 
bert T. Reid; national secretary, | 
Wilford S. Conrow; national treas-| 
urer, Edmund Magrath, and na-} 
tional chairman for regional chap-| 
ters and for American Art Week, | 
Mrs. Florence L. Hohman, 


ventures 


Art Show at Newark Museum illustratio 


Newark Museum's thirty-five 

years of active leadership in the} 
cultural life of its community are| 
being celebrated by an exhibition, 
“A Museum in Action,” which 
opened yesterday to continue until} 
Jan. 31. Practically all the gal-| 
leries in the museum are given} 
over to this display, which includes} 
275 American paintings and sculp-| 
ture of the last century and a 
quarter that belong to the 
museum 


Label, 


stories. 


knows “ALMOST 
EVERYTHING” 


NODS ~2 BECKS 


by Franklin 


These “same and salty” 


P. Adams 


paragraphs and verses 


A. Weslager 
Pennsylvania Press, $2.50). “A 
story of archaeological adven- 


LES GRANDES AMITIES 


de 


Raissa Maritain 
la Maison 
The second volume in a series 
of autobiographical studies 
MECHANICAL 
TAUGHT, by Jerome 8 
(Watts, $1). Twenty-one step- 
by-step exercises and fifty-six 


ns. 


SECOND MYSTERY COMPANION, ed- 

ited by A. L. Furman 
$2.75). 
chosen as the best of the past 
year’s mystery and detective 


Francaise, 


DRAWING 


, collection, 
(University ot 

same _ galleries, 
lection $34,901. 


(Les Ad- 
la Grace), by | ; 
(Editions de |Paine to George Washington, 


2205_>»L——O>F——_——__—* 


SELF- Vi 
Meyer 


(Gold 
A collection 


yielded $18,980, 
making the total for the entire col-| 


Monday afternoon. Part one of 


| The Carnegie Book Shop paid! 
|$1,100 for a letter from Thomas! 


= FARRAR 4 RINEHART, N.Y 


“The first piece of writing so far 
which has really given me any idea of 


what it is like to operate a bomber... 


Full of intimate observation of how peo- 


ple speak, feel, and behave.” 


—Edmund Wilson, THE NEW YORKER 


“Something very special indeed... 


brings the war in the air to life in print 


as few books have done before.” 


The young 


Chinese author 


of the 
delightful 


autobiography 


A LONG WAY 


I'VE COME 


writes a 


—N. Y. TIMES 


By Sergeants 


BUD HUTTON and 
‘ANDY ROONEY 


a 


BE: 


- OLY "0 ig 
The Story of Civilizauon } 


CESAR #4 


* AND 


Sf CHRIST 


; 
j 

a ne 
j 


mom Maneers a memels he oat ws 
rrsce forces sak vanes th 


* seoegh ‘ocome Cheek web Sew j 
j 


WILL DURANT | | 


nstant OvatLONsS Tor 
CAESAR annCHRIST, 
Will Durant’s new book 


THE SATURDAY REVIEW OF LITERATURE: 


“His book merits a place of honor in a world that has 
enjoyed Gibbon, Mommsen, and Ferrero. He has reinter 
preted and synthesized an entire culture with conscien 
tious objectivity His style IS WItty and fast moving 
Scholarly research has rarely been translated into such a 
lively and stimulating, yet accurate history.” 


BOOK-OF-THE-MONTH CLUB NEWS: 


“A wise 
with brilliant passages of observation and comment 
work so far in print devotes so much of its 

eral cultural history as opposed to the mere 
events. As a union for the first time of diverse elements 


the book is unequalled.’ 
REVEREND JOHN HAYNES HOLMES: 


Lal 
I venture to suggest that not since Lord Macaulay have 


tolerant well-balanced volume. shot thr 


space t 


narrative of 


we had an historian whose works present such a combr- 
nation of scholarship and brilliant style.” 


786 Pages 40 Plates, Ulustrations, Maps 
Price $5.00 . 


SIMON AND Sc HUSTER Publishers 


SR ne mere es: 


other people are waiting © 


~~ for their copies of 
- KATHLEEN 
ie WINSOR eo 


Place your order with 
your bookseller today, to 
be sure that you will get 
a copy of this great new 
hest seller as soon as he 
does. We are supplying 
him as fast as the books 





can be manufactured. 


$3.00 


MACMILLAN 


Aton ann etn nnn cane alta aeaate. SX. 


author of Citizen Tom Pine and Freedom Road 
says about THE CROSS AND THE ARROW: 


“... the finest novel in many years... 
superb work of art...at once a tale of high 
adventure and a testimony for mankind... he 
(Maltz) knows human beings . .. he loves them 
. «he believes in them ... His book is one sign 
of @ reborn American literature.” —The Worker 


| RUTH McKENNEY author of My Sister, Eileen 


says about THE CROSS AND THE ARROW: 


warm novel 
of the unconquerable 


represent the best columns, poems, articles and 
criticism written by the sage of Information 
Please—a collection of incomparable entertain- 
ment and a one-volume sampling of the essen- 
tral spint of our time. $2.00 


| 

| e $2.50 © At booksell 

Chinese people | your bookseller 
} 


“An event in literary history... With the 

the publication of THE CROSS AND THE ARROW, 
Albert Maltz becomes one of the major Amer- 
ican writers, a member of that limited contem- 
porary circle which includes Steinbeck, Heming- 
way, Christina Stead, Dreiser, the earlier Dos 
Passos and a very few others... Four-star, 
AAAA.” 


None Bub 
AMaule 


Westward 


THE VIKING PRESS ~- Tier. $2.50 t 
| 


WHITTLESEY HOUSE + McGRAW-HILL BOOK CO. + NEW YORK 18 


THE NEW MAJOR NOVEL 
BY THE AUTHOR OF 


renee", | THE CROSS 
Howard Spring ||“ ARROW 
H A R D - AC TS By Albert Maltz 


$2.50 


°o 
| Chungki 
POX ‘oe c un ing 
For sheer ae erate ten 
delight read 


ANNA 


AND THE 


By Helena Kuo 


“A chronicle of mixed joy 
and sorrow...a story of 
simple human emotions, a 
record of marriages, births, 
funerals, and day to day 
living.”"—Chicago Tribune 


“Miss Kuo ‘achieves sure 
and vivid authenticity. 
Tien-Min seems real and 
he is fascinating...the 
very incarnation of some 
of the qualities we love in 
China.”"—N. Y. Herald 
Tribune Book Review. 
$2.75 


APPLETON-CENTURY 


ost 


Sic 
Nazarene ; 


A NOVEL BASED ON THE LIFE OF CHRIS 
$3.90 
PUTNAM 


H 


A NOVE 


.; 


By MARGARET 
LANDON 


40 Illus. - $3.75 
OO Oe 


JOHN DAY PYVOQDOODGY 


At all bookstores @ $2.75 


THE VIKING PRESS 


LITTLE, BROWN & CO. 





The New Pork Times 


Reg. U. S. Pat. Off. 
“Ali the News That's Fit te Print." 
ADOLPH S. Ocus, Publisher 1896-1935. 


Published Every Day in the Year by 
THE NEw YorK TIMES COMPANY. 


ARTHUR Hars SULZBERGER, 
President and Publisher. 


Julius OcHs ADLER,* 
Vice President and General Manager. 


Goprarr N. Nevson, Secretary. 


“Brig. Gen. Adier is absent on military duty. 

SL 

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 
| ee —— —— a 

OFFICES OF THE NEW YORK TIMES 

New York City. Telephone LAckawanna 4-1000 

Main Office Times suilding, 229 W. 43d St. (18) 

Times Tower.Times Sq. (18) | Downtown, 220 Bway (7 








Minsota... Tel. Garden City 8900 
NEWARK Tel. Market 3-3900. 744 Broad St 

Wars PLains..Tel. White Plains 5300. 36 Grand St 
BestTon News, Herald-Traveler Building 
PHILADELPHIA 
WASHINGTON 
Cxicacgo..News, 435 N. Michigan 


News, Albee Bidg. Battimore. Sun Bldg 
Bus., 230 N. Michigan 
Derroir 
San Francisco. . News, Chronicle Bidg.; Bus., Russ Bldg 
Los ANGELES Park Central Building 
OTTAWA 22 Goulburn Ave. LONDON Savoy Hotel 
Panis 37 Rue Caumartin 
ROME 

DUBLIN 

Carro..Al Ahram House 
Rw De JaNneio..Graca Aranha 182 
HavVaNna..Manzana de Gomez 212 

CANAL ZONE 


14 Blackheath Pk.. Clontarf 
BUENOS Arres..San Martin 344 
Berene..5 Bahnhofplats 

Mexico City.. Bucareli 8 
Balboa Heights 


SUBSCRIPTION RATES: UNITED STATES, 
POSSESSIONS AND TERRITORIES 
i Yr 6 Mos. 3 Mos 
$17.00 $8.50 $4.25 
12.00 6.00 3.00 
3.00 1.50 
4x 


1 Mo 
$1.50 
1.00 
15 


ke 
*Dalls and Sunday 
TWeekday 
Sunday 

“One week, 50c 


6.00 
TOne week 


America 
3 Mos 
$5.50 

3.75 
2.30 


Canada, Central and Soutt 
Edition 1 Yr 6 Mos 
Daily and Sunday $22.00 §=$11.00 
Weekdays 15.00 7.50 
Sunday 500 4.00 


1 Mo 
$2.50 
1.50 


For Rates to Other Foreign Countries Apply 
Circulation Department 


THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW (weekly), 
a@ year, $2; Canada, $3; foreign, $3.50. 
The New York Times U.S Foreign 
Index Possessions. Canada. Countries 
12 monthly volumes $20.00 $22.00 $20.00 
Annual Cumulative Index.. 26.00 28.60 27.00 
Monthly and Annual 35.00 38.50 36.00 
RAG PAPER edition for preservation, cloth bound, 2 
volumes per month, $200 per annum; semi-monthly 
bound volumes, regular newsprint, $80 per annum. 
The Associated Press is entitled exclusively to the 
use for republication of all news dispatches credited 
to it or mot otherwise credited in this paper and 
local news of spontaneous origin published herein 
Rights of repubiication of all other matter herein 
are aiso reserved 


THE CHINESE CRISIS 
This newspaper's Chungking 





cor- 


1527 Franklin Ave. | 


| 


choosing. We must accept him as we 
expect him to accept whichever candi- 
date is elected President in our own 
country next week. The Generalissimo’s 


| severest critics in China, even those in 
| the Communist areas, recognize him 








News, Inquirer Building | 


| as the one man who can at this time 


represent their nation. 
We can, however, and our Govern- 


| ment should, make it clear to Chiang 


that his prestige will be enhanced, not 
diminished, if he takes certain steps: 
if he accepts American military guid- 
ance in return for American military 


| help; if he throws the whole weight of 
| his armies against the Japanese instead 
| of holding a great part of them inactive 
| or on guard duty against his political 


opponents; if he makes a genuine truce 
with the Chinese Communists, who are, 
in fact, peasant agrarians; if he con- 
sents to take into his Government 
members of the representative groups 
and parties; and if he permits the free- 


| dom of the press and of discussion 


4-169 General Motors Building | 


which is the only possible basis for the 
| the State Senate and for sixty-seven 


| democracy to which he has again and 


Via Della Mercede 54 | 


1.25 | 


again pledged himself. 

No matter what happens we cannot 
fail in our friendship for the Chinese 
people. We cannot fail in gratitude to 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, who 
has met the supreme test and refused 
to surrender. Peace in the Orient with- 
out a stable and prosperous China is 
unthinkable. 
frankly in the interests of that sta- 
bility, that prosperity and the freedom 
without which neither can be attained. 


HOW LONG THE WAR? 


Giving official expression to revised | 


military estimates regarding the dura- 
tion of the war, Mr. Churchill has 
advised Parliament that, barring un- 


likely domestic upheavals in Germany | 


or Japan, the war in Europe may last 


| till the end of spring or early summer 
|and that the Pacific war must be ex- 


pected to continue for at least another 
eighteen months after that. As regards 


the Pacific war, Mr. Churchill’s esti- | 
cause of good government at Albany. 


mate has always been accepted as a 


| minimum by all but the most opti- 


turned from China, was able yesterday | 
to bring out into the open the unhappy | 


sequence of events which led to the re- 
call of Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell. Mr. 
Atkinson is fully supported by a dis- 
patch sent by Preston Grover, Asso- 
ciated Press correspondent at New 
Delhi, which is published today, and by 
much other evidence. 

This story, which Chinese censorship 
would not pass, has been a matter of 
open knowledge among informed Amer- 
icans in China. Rumors of the truth, 


pressed dispatches, have probably been 
doing more harm than the facts them- 
selves can do. We now have the in- 


formation upon which American opin- | G A liti * lla i 
ion can be formed and which may well | wn Sa on — re dnageaal . 
| vigorous prosecution of the war at 


ead t ore genuine union with the | : 
ne SS & me g was | least until Hitler’s Germany is crushed. 


Chinese people, in purpose and in ac- 
tion, than has yet been attained. 

The facts are that China’s war 
against the Japanese, since the Decem- 
ber day nearly three years ago when 
it became of vital importance to our- 


mistic, chiefly junior, naval authorities. 


respondent, Brooks Atkinson, just re- | AS regards the war in Europe, the 


Prime Minister admitted that his esti- 
mate is no more than a guess, and that 
many high military authorities with 
every means to form a correct judg- 
ment are more hopeful. 
nobody can guarantee that the fighting 
will be over by Christmas, or even 
by Easter. And only after they are 
through in Europe will it be possible 
for the Allies to unleash their full 
power against Japan. 


In making these Mr. 


estimates 


leaking out in various ways and some- | the life of this Parliament, already nine 


times implicit in references in unsup- | 


years old, for another year, which will 
give it half the life span of Britain’s 


| famed Long Parliament of the Crom- 


well era. He did so in order to avoid 
an election now and keep the present 


It is daily becoming more evident 


| that in regard both to the issues be- 
| tween the warring Powers and to the 
| political conditions among our enemies 
| this is quite a different war from the 


| last. 


selves, has been handicapped by inter- | 


nal discord, between the Chungking 
Government and the so-called Chinese 


shek and some of his generals; by cor- 
ruption, in which Chiang had no per- 
sonal share but which he has been un- 
abie to prevent; and by Chiang’s reluc- 
tance and final] refusal to entrust Gen- 
eral Stilwell with full command of a 
unified and enhanced Chinese effort, by 
land and by air, against the Japanese. 
The United States lost a battle, and the 
Chinese people may be said to have 
lost one, too, when Chiang forced Stil- 
well’s recall. 

This is the situation, and 
acute one. But before passing judg- 
ment we should consider certain other— 
and this time well-known—facts. These 
are that for more than seven years 
Chiang has refused to make peace with 
the Japanese, though in 1941 and prob- 


Mr. Roosevelt and Mr. Churchill 
have both assured the German people 


| that they are not going to be enslaved, 


i Nations do not traf- 
Communists and between Chiang Kai- | becstne (he Wated Diatttne <o.m 


fic in human slavery, and Marshal 
Stalin has expressed himself to the ef- 


fect that the German people cannot be | 
| destroyed, 


nor even completely dis- 
armed—a point stressed constantly by 
the Free Germany Committee in Mos- 


cow. But all the United Nations are 


agreed that there will be no bargaining | 


with Germany this time, that this war 


must be fought through to the bitter | 
armistice, only to be choked off the | 


end until Germany surrenders uncon- 


ditionally, that the war criminals who | 


2 . 
| sowed the wind and are now reaping 


it is an | 


the whirlwind must be punished, and 
that the United Nations alone will set 


| the conditions under which Germany 


| tions. 


ably later he had tempting offers; that | 


the Chinese resistance, though it has 
declined in effectiveness, has neverthe- 
less detained a large number of Japa- 
nese troops which we might otherwise 
have had to fight elsewhere, and that 


will be permitted to earn her way back 
into the fellowship of law-abiding na- 
This also goes for the Japanese. 

That hard fighting still lies ahead, 
both in Europe and in Asia, must be 
clear to all of us., The temporary 


| stalling of the Allied offensives on the 


Rhine and in East Prussia demonstrates 


| that German resistance has not been 


| without effect. 


the Chinese people, deprived of their | 


ports, their railroads cut or occupied, 
their eastern highways controlled by 
the enemy, their cities and villages 
murderously sacked, their industries 
driven hundreds of miles into the in- 
terior, their lives taken by famine and 
disease as well as by enemy action, 
have nevertheless not wavered. In- 
trigue, ambition, jealousy and dishon- 
esty have been in high places, but the 
underfed, ill-armed, often badly led 
Chinese soldier has marched, suffered 
and died for his country with a heroism 
unsurpassed in any nation’s history. 
We thus owe a debt to the soldiers 
and people of China which nothing we 
can do will repay. To that debt Britain 
may add the harm she did when she 
temporarily closed the Burma Road 
and we may add the harm we did when 
we tried to appease Japan by providing 
her with metals and with gasoline. 
But we cannot pay this debt to the 


Unless a clear break- 
through can be achieved soon, a hard 
campaign throughout the winter is the 
only alternative. As for Japan, its real 
military strength has not even been 
touched so far. 

For all these reasons it is only pru- 
dent to accept Mr, Churchill's estimates 
as accurate. They may be changed by 
military or political miracles, but it 
would indeed be foolish to count on 
them, 


A MODEL COMMUNIQUE 


No finer piece of straightforward, 


|unvarnished description of a compli- 


than Admiral imitz’s summary of the 


| Second Battle of the Philippine Sea— 


| Pacific Fleet Communiqué 168. 


Any 


| grade-school pupil, after reading Com- 


people of China by acquiescing in polie | 


cies which are obviously not to their 
good. We cannot provide even a 
trickle of lend-lease if it is to be used 


in civil war or held in reserve to build | 
up anybody’s personal power, whether | 
Chiang’s or a provincial war, lord’s. | 


We share with the people of China, 
and with every Chinese who has their 
welfare at heart, the mission to break 
the Japanese power and set China free. 
We have no material aim in China, 
beyond that of a mutually profitable 


| 1,500 words. 


muniqué 168, would be able to under- 
stand just how the Japanese Fleet was 


discovered approaching the Philippines, | 


how the United States forces went to 
work and the well-nigh perfect job they 
did. 

The diction is almost Anglo-Saxon in 
its use of one syllable words. There is 
no fancy writing, there is no glossing 
over or undue elaboration in the entire 
The report moves swiftly, 


as the action must have moved; it 


throbs with the stimulating pace of di- | 


rect statement; it leaves room for the 
imagination to picture the exciting 


| events but at the same time limits the 


trade, as between two free and friendly | 


nations, when victory has been won. 
We are in a peculiarly strong position 
when we ask the full cooperation of 
those in authority in Chungking. 

We are no more entitled to demand 
the replacement of Chiang Kai-shek 
than we would be to ask Britain to 
drop Mr. Churchill or Russia to substi- 
tute for Mr. Stalin a person of our own 


| flight. 


area in which the imagination may take 
Technically correct to satisfy 
the most exacting demands of the most 
literal naval historian, it satisfies, 
equally, the passion of 
American to know all about it. 

“The Japanese Fleet has been de- 
cisively defeated and routed,” Admiral 
Nimitz said, and then placed the en- 
counter in proper perspective by calling 





But it is time to speak | 





But certainly | 














| side. 





the average | 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER Il, 1944. 


it “one of the major sea battles of the 
war in the Pacific,” alongside Coral 
Sea, Midway and Guadalcanal. The 
three separate sea engagements—off 
Surigao Strait, in the Sibuyan Sea and 
below Formpsa—are limned in their 
separate entities and then brought into 
proper interrelationship. 

Throughout this war the best com- 
muniqués have been issued by the Brit- 
ish Admiralty. They, too, are simple 
and direct in their description. Admiral 
Nimitz has gone the Admiralty one bet- 
ter. Communiqué 168 may be a minor 
victory compared to the “overwhelm- 
ing” one it relates, but it is no less ap- 
preciated for all that. 


THE STATE LEGISLATURE 


In the five counties of this citv there 
are 246 candidates for the State Legis- 
lature in this year’s elections. No news- 
paper could hope to examine adequately 
the records and the claims of all these 
246 candidates for twenty-five seats in 


seats in the State Assembly. There are, 
however, certain claims which rest on 
outstanding ability or on particularly 
meritorious public service. The 


the basis of their records, have received 
the endorsement of the Citizens Union. 
This is a wholly nonpartisan and non- 
political organization which makes a 
closer study of the qualifications of 
legislative candidates than is made by 
any other agency. 

It should be understood, of course, 
that this list does not attempt to in- 
clude all of the abie and deserving can- 
didates for the Senate and the Assem- 
bly. The Citizens Union itself describes 
many additional candidates as “quali- 
fied” or as “qualified and preferred.” 
But we believe that the citizen who has 
a chance to vote in his or her own dis- 


| triet for one of the eighteen candidates 


specifically “endorsed” will have an 
especially good chance to help the 


The list ignores all party lines and 
includes Republicans, Democrats, Lib- 
erals and American Labor party candi- 
dates, and various combinations of such 
party designations: 

SENATE 

In New York County—Francis J. 
Mahoney (Dem.) in the Nineteenth 
District, Frederic R. Coudert Jr. (Rep.) 


list 
given here eonsists of the names of the | 
| eighteen legislative candidates who, on | 











| 
| 
| 


in the Twentieth, and Alexander A. | 


In Kings County—-Samuel L. Green- 


| berg (Dem.-A, L. P.) in the Twelfth | 


| District, and Louis L. Friedman (Dem.) 
Churchill asked for the prolongation of | Distri d 


in the Fifteenth. 

In Queens County—Seymour Halpern 
(Rep.) in the Fourth District. 

In Bronx County—Lazarus Joseph 
(Dem.-A. L, P.) in the Twenty-fourth 
District, Carl Pack (Dem.-A. L. P.) in 
the Twenty-fifth, and Isidore Dollinger 
(Dem.-A, L, P.) in the Twenty-sixth. 

ASSEMBLY 


In New York County—MacNeil 
Mitchell (Rep.) in the First District, 
John J. Lamula (Rep.) in the Second, 
Leonard Farbstein (Dem.) in the 
Fourth, William T. Andrews (Dem.-A, 
L. P.) in the Twelfth, Hulan E. Jack 
(Dem.-A. L. P.) in the Fourteenth, and 
Hamlet O. Catenaccio (Rep.-A. L. P.) 
in the Sixteenth. 

In Kings County—Lewis W. Olliffe 
(Rep.-A. L. P.) in the Tenth District. 

In Bronx County—Arthur Wachtel 
(Dem.-A. L. P.) in the Fifth District 


| Falk (Dem.-Lib.-A. L. P.) in the Twen- | 
| ty-third. | 





and Louis Bennett (Dem.-A,. L. P.) in | 


| the Eighth. 


BATTLE FOR BUDAPEST 
Since Admiral Horthy begged for an 


lin, evidently in some alarm, tells us 


| that Russian armies have driven to the 
very center of the country and that the | 


roar of Russian guns can be heard in 
Budapest. The German people, it 


of another capital. 

Germany has no new army to spare 
for the defense of Budapest. Depending 
on the divided and demoralized Hun- 
garian Army is like expecting a pneu- 
monia patient to defend his hospital. 
The Nazi puppets in present control of 
the city count for little. The wide plain 
over which three massive Russian 
armies are advancing on Budapest is 
empty of natural defenses. 

The submission of Budapest will 
mean the submission of Hungary. 
Never very eager to fight for Germany, 
the Hungarians were nevertheless the 
bast fighting allies she had. Their cap- 
ital has been the key to the upper 
Danube since the days of Rome, for it 
is the one citadel guarding the easy 
road into Austria. Its railroad network 


| knits a highly industrialized area into 


an economic unit. Any hostile army 


cated action has come out of this war | marching into Budapest will thrust a 


spearhead deep into Germany’s softest 
The Axis has few more major 
cities to lose. 


LONG ISLAND'S SHARE 


The full importance of the Long 
Island manufacturing area to the war 
in the air will be news to a good many 
New Yorkers. They have, of course, 
read of the high exploits of Grumman's 


| Hellceats and Avengers and of Repub- 
| lic’s Thunderbolts. 


They are among 
the stars of the show. But it is satis- 
fying to learn also that the area is 


| contributing so capably to the sup- 


porting cast of cameras, instruments, 
engines and accessories, to make a 
total of $1,300,000,000 of orders now 
on the books. 

Equally gratifying is the assurance 
with which such companies as Sperry 
and Fairchild look to the future. The 
cameras and gyroscopes and other 
instruments of jewel-like precision 
which they make, and without which 
the Hellcats and Thunderbolts could 
not accurately find and hit the enemy, 
were long thought to be impossible of 
production except by highly skilled 
craftsmen. 


| seems, are being prepared for the loss 


less of 





necessities of war have mothered not 
only new devices but new methods of 
manufacture in which high skill is 
needed only for supervision and final 
checking. 

Hence, as these companies look to 
demobilization, they see no vast num- 
ber of skilled hands thrown out of 
work. Many women’s hands will re- 
turn to their homes or to jobs they 
held before the war in producing 
civilian goods of many kinds. And a 
substantial part of the forces in these 
factories will be kept busy after the 
war making accessories, not only for 
the expanded air age, but many new 
things for use on the ground. 


Topics of The Times 


Reference here is to the 
budget of errors which so 
regularly accumulates in 
these paragraphs in the 
course of time, and not 
such a very long time either. Often we 
succeed with a single stroke of the pen 
in eliciting a little flood of corrections 
which we are glad to acknowledge. 

We were in technical error a few 
days ago in saying that the year 1353 
was nearly two hundred years before 
there was a Church of England. Our 
mind was on Henry VIII, but we should 
have said a Church of England sep- 
arated from Rome. It is the accepted 
doctrine that there has been a Church 
of England ever since Augustine, and 
we have been referred to Magna Charta, 
which speaks of Ecclesia Anglicana, or 
the English Church, 

One of our correspondents makes the 
point that there actually was a Church 
of England before there was an Eng- 
land, to the formation of which out of 
the various Saxon kingdoms the Church 
contributed. 


The 
Usual 
Budget 


In the matter of possible 
English New Yorks in foreign 
climes our original state- 
ment a few days ago said 
that the indexes to the big 
atlases showed no town or village 
called New York anywhere. Two read- 
ers now testify to the existence of two 
small places called New York in Eng- 
land, and they offer the best of evi- 
dence: they have motored or bicycled 
through them. 


New 
Yorks 


One such New York is | 





situated between Lincoln and Boston, | 


on the branch of the road that runs 
from Horncastle to Boston. 


The other New York is in the ex- | 


tween Newcastle and the North Sea. 


| “The first time I passed through it,” 


says our correspondent, “knowing New 
York in the U, 8S. A. only by reputation 
and from photographs of the Wool- 
worth Building, I marveled at the con- 
trast between that legendary city and 
the tiny, dirty little colliery village 
which bore the famous name.” 

The writer then wonders if this 
Northumberland hamlet took its name 
from New York on the Hudson or from 
the original York in England from 
which Mayor La Guardia’s city got its 
name by way of the Duke of York. But 
in any event these two New Yorks are 
not to be found on the available Eng- 
lish maps nor are they mentioned in the 
detailed travel routes in the Baedeker 
Britain. 


What happens in and to 
the colleges after the war 
depends a good deal on 
the college teacher, ac- 
cording to W. L. Werner 
of Pennsylvania State College. But it 
is not merely or even chiefly a question 
of technical efficiency, a problem of 
good teachers and bad teachers. Mr. 


Teachers 
and 
Citizens 


Werner feels that college teachers in | 


| air by his Nazi betrayers, we have had the past have failed because too often 


no real news from Hungary. Now Ber- | 


they have allowed the teacher to swal- 
low the good citizen. They have denied 
their social responsibilities. They have 
refused to take their proper share in 
the building of new worlds. 


That is why, says Mr. 
Werner in a recent number 
of the Bulletin of the 
American Association of 
University Professors, the 
general public at one critical period 
in recent history sought guidance else- 
where: } 

“In the disillusioned post-war decade 
of the Nineteen Twenties the people of 
England and America turned hungrily 
to a book and made it a best seller. 
** * It was H. G. Wells’ Outline of 
History, the first book to present to the 


The 
Famous 
Outline 


|} common man in language that he could 


understand the history of the whole 
world as a_ slow, gure, 
progress.” 


This is a _ statement 
which may be challenged 
on several grounds for 
which there is obviously 
no room or occasion here. 
But there is one question that may be 
boldly put. Did the famous Wells book 
cure post-war disillusion or did it con- 
tribute to such disillusion? It was pub- 
lished in 1920, little more than a year 
after the armistice and while the proc- 
peacemaking was still under 
way. If post-war disillusion was al- 
ready functioning it was obviously of 


Did 
Mr. Wells 
Help? 


| very short growth, Came then the Out- 


line of History in 1920, and were the 
people of England and America healed 
of their disillusion? Or ig it not a fact 


| that as the decade unfolded the spirit 


of disillusion and negation and general 
nihilism increased until brought to an 
end by the sharp cold douche of the 
economic depression ? 

Mr. Wells says in his Who's Who 
sketch that the book was written to dis- 
place “narrow nationalist history by a 
general review of the human record.” 
But if the Wells book helped to dis- 
credit existing beliefs—to which we are 
now returning—is there anything to 
show that the Outline promoted a sub- 
stitute faith in world fellowship? The 
story of the years between 1920 and 
1939 show a steady decline in the ideal 
of world fellowship which a former 
college professor, Woodrow Wilson, had 


As in so many cases, the | popularized some time before Mr. Wells. 


Abroad 


Belgium Seeks Strong Friends 
for the Future 


By ANNE O’HARE McCORMICK 
By Wireless to Tas New Yorx Tras, 

BRUSSELS, Oct. 31—There are no 
frontiers in the war zone. One crosses 
flat gray country from northern France 
into Belgium and from Belgium into 
Holland without pause at the demarca- 
tion line that ordinarily separates na- 
tion from nation. Yet even in wartime, 
when the military picture superimposed 
on distinctive features makes the face 
of every country look oddly alike, the 
atmosphere changes as perceptibly as 
if boundaries were still dividing lines. 

The atmosphere of Belgium is sharp- 
ly different from that of France. The 
two countries face similar problems— 
the terrible problems the Germans 
leave behind everywhere—but on a dif- 
ferent scale and in a different spirit. 
Bent on resuming her place among the 
great powers, France constantly as- 


serts her independence and emphasizes | 


her sacrifices. Concern for French 


prestige colors every thought and ges- | 


ture of the de Gaulle Government. Bel- 
gium is profoundly aware of her place 
as a small nation. She has lived nearly 
nine years out of the past thirty under 
German occupation and this experience 
has left an ineradicable mark on the 
mind and outlook of her people. It 
shapes their attitude today. Belgium 
wants help. She seeks powerful friends. 
Her one idea, when she can turn her 
attention away from the immediate 
need of food, is to align herself closely 
and definitely with nations stronger 
than herself. So far as the present 
generation can speak for the future, 
the policy of neutrality for which the 
panicky Belgium of 1936 broke ties 
with France and Britain is abandoned 
forever. 

As of today, at least, the powerful 
friend the Belgians have chosen is 
England. One point whereon people 
inside and outside the Government seem 
to agree is that the country must be 
economically and politically at one with 
Great Britain. They all talk of a west- 
ern bloc, including France, the Nether- 


lands and the United Kingdom, but 


it is to England especially they desire | 
to be bound on the most intimate terms | 


possible. 
British Isles with countries across the 


treme north of England half way be- | Channel finds wide support here. 


The feeling is reciprocal, The first 
thing the observer notices is the un- 
usual warmth of British praise for the 
Belgians. While American troops hold 
a great part of the Belgian line, the 
liberation of the country was primarily 
a British show. Brussels is the head- 
quarters of the British Twenty-first 
Army. The head of the SHAEF mis- 
sion in Belgium is a well-known British 
officer, Gen. “Bobby” Erskine, com- 
mander of the famous “Desert Rats” 
in the African campaign and a prom- 
inent figure in every landing from 
Sicily to Normandy. 

A rather gruff brigadier likes to tell 
of a tiny girl who approached him in 
a suburban street yesterday and shyly 
held out her hand. “Will you permit 
me to say bon jour and welcome to you, 
Monsieur?” she said gravely. They 
never tire of repeating the story of the 
King's Own Guard, the first troops to 
enter the city on the evening of Sept. 
3. Their first thought, it seems, was to 
go to the palace to inquire if Queen 
Elizabeth, mother of King Leopold, was 
all right. She came out to thank them 


and express regret she could offer them | 
| would consent and willingly help to be | 


nothing to drink because the Germans 
had taken everything, and nothing to 


eat because she had not food enough | 
“But I can give you all | 


for so many. 


a hot bath,” she said. So 160 Guards- | 


men had a bath in the royal palace 
and camped on the grounds all night. 
The sense of deliverance seems 
stronger in Belgium than in any other 
liberated country. Paris cheered and 
laughed when Allied troops marched 
in but Brussels cheered and wept. Near- 
ly two months later it is still cheering 
though it is now apparent the Allies 
cannot fulfill the hopes of the populace 
for bread and work. But whereas in 
France and Italy people incline to 
blame the Allies for unexpectedly hard 
conditions that accompany the con- 
tinuing battle for freedom the Belgians 
blame their own Government, Belgium 
is the first country to be ruled by a 
returned Government in Exile, the 
legitimacy whereof is recognized with- 


| out question by the country itself and 
continual | 


the Allied powers. Members of the 
Cabinet declare they came back with 
the intention of resigning at once in 
favor of men of the interior. But the 
political parties were completely dis- 
organized during four and a half years 
of occupation. There was no free press, 
hence no vocal public opinion. “We 
had to retain our posts,” two Ministers 
explained to the writer, “because there 
was literally no one to take our place.” 

Nevertheless the position of the Gov- 
ernment is very precarious. The people 
approved with remarkable unanimity 


the drastic measures like the plan to | 


call in all currency in an effort to re- 
duce the purchasing power and svoid 
inflation. This is the biggest dose of 
financial castor oil ever administered 
to any nation and people swallowed it 
because they believed strong medicine 
was indicated. But other measures 
necessary to make the remedy work 
were not taken. Prices have not fallen 
because the disastrous scarcity of es- 
sential goods has not been relieved. 
The complaint is that the Government 
isn’t going far enough. 

This explains the impromptu decision 
of the British to send in two thousand 
tons of food in the next twenty days. 
The army chiefs are anxious to support 
the present Government because they 
want no upset during the most critical 
winter of the war. The experience of 
occupation is teaching the military 
command that diversion of supplies is 
sometimes a necessary alternative to 
diversion of armed forces to police 
starving populations behind the lines. 


Smuts’ idea of a union of the | 


Letters to 


Services Need Whole Blood 


Plasma Useful in Emergencies but Not 
Always Completely Efficacious 


To rus Epiror or THz New York Timzs: 

Your editorial comment of Oct. 30, 
“Blood Will Tell,” stimulates me to 
make a corrective addition to your 
statements and to append a plea. 

Since millions of us have contributed 
blood to the American Red Cross and 
to hospital blood banks, it seems to me 
that a little more should be said about 
the relative value of whole blood trans- 
fusions and the use of derivatives of 
blood. It is true and provocative that 
Dr. Kohn’s researches are making it 
possible to concentrate specific frac- 
tions of the blood for specific properties 
which they possess. 1 

This promises to be a rich source of 
highly effective therapeutic agents, as 
your editorial recognizes. However, all 
of these fractional portions are derived 

| from blood plasma, leaving nothing said 
about the residual 45 per cent of blood, 
the living cellular elements which in- 
clude the essential substance, haemo- 
| globin. 


separated and purified, it unfortunately | 


cannot be administered in this form to 


replace lost blood. For its role in me- | 
tabolism, haemoglobin can only func- 





tion within the red corpuscle, where 
through enzyme activity it serves as 
the means of bringing oxygen to the 
tissues. 

I point out these facts of physiology 
in order to introduce a point touched 
upon in a radio broadcast last week by 
Surgeon General Kirk of the Army, that 
while plasma has saved many lives as 
emergency treatment in the field, whole 
blood transfusions are often indispen- 
sable. Casualties who have suffered 
substantial blood loss, or who have be- 


particularly malaria, can be effectively 
helped only by transfusion of whole 
blood. There may come a time when 
this, too, may be reduced to vials and 


ampoules, but unfortunately that time | 


is not in sight even in the most ad- 
vanced research laboratories 
Meanwhile, whole blood must be 
flown to the front or casualties re- 
turned to the rear where transfusions 
| are available. Those of us who want to 
help might do as many of our neigh- 
| bors on Staten Island are doing. They 





| have enrolled themselves with us as | 


| blood donors to come to the Marine 
Hospital as they are called upon when 
the need for whole ‘blood arises. Groups 
of citizens come here for this high pur- 
pose several times a month. In all 
communities surrounding service hos- 
pitals such an organized plan would fill 
a great and growing need. 
LAWRENCE H. SOPHIAN, 
Senior Surg. (R) USPHS. 
Staten Island, N. Y., Oct. 30, 1944. 


Split-Up Reich Advocated 


Close Political and Economic Control 
Viewed as Necessary 


To THE Epitor oF THE New YorK TIMES: 
In your issue of Oct. 27 Lewis May- 


of the Reich, and the forced immigra- 
tion of those people into the interior of 
each annexing nation. 

That would be a good solution of the 
| German re-education problem if we 
could be certain that these émigrés 





permeated by the Europear. civilization. 
But, unfortunately, it is more prob- 


| rather convey their ugly Nazi propa- 
| ganda within the annexing nations. 
Their groups would be together, the 
basis of a fifth column and the pretext 
for a “question of minority,” such as 
those which s. deeply marred the Euro- 
pean life between the two mondial wars. 


Besides, I am sure that people of the | 


annexing nations, and especially the 

French people, would be most reluctant 

to have some Boches as fellow-citizens. 

The conclusion is that if annexation 

| of some parts of Germany proves to be 
necessary, the best way would be to 

oblige the German inhabitants to go 

| into Germany itself. But, are the an- 
nexations indispensable? I for one be- 

lieve that the splitting up of the Reich 

into a series of independent states is 

sufficient to insure a lasting peace, on 


| the condition that these new states are | 


occupied by the forces of the United 
| Nations ami put under tight political 
and economic control during a very 
‘long while. ROGER PICARD. 
White Plains, N Y., Oct. 30, 1944. 


Dog Muzzling Urged 
To THE Epiror or THe New YorK TIMEs: 

| I have just consulted the Health 
Department and have learned to my 

astonishment that there is no local 

ordinance requiring dogs to be muzzied 

while on the street. The only ordinance 

| is one requiring them to be on a leash. 
| In view of the two cases within the 
| last fortnight in which children have 
been bitten by dogs which were on 

leash and presumably accompanied by 

their masters, something should be 

done by the City Council and without 

further delay. It is undoubtedly most 

uncomfortable for the dog to be muz- 

zled, but it seems the only realistic 

way of treating the situation. 
GLADYs Huss. 
New York, Oct. 30, 1944. 


Asks Full Support of Congress 
To THe Epitor or THe New York Times: 

After reading the telegrams the Re- 
publican representatives sent to Mr. 
Dewey, which he used in a recent 
speech, I would like to know: Are we 
to assume that these worthy gentlemen 
will support only Mr. Dewey In the Con- 
gress, although the majority of the peo- 
ple may find it fitting to elect Mr. 
Roosevelt ? : 

Or is it a threat that unless we elect 


Although haemoglobin can be | 


come anemic as the result of infection, | 


ers suggests the dispersal of the Ger- | 
man population of each annexed area | 


able that these German émigrés would | 


———-—~ + 


The Times 


| Mr. Dewey they will not support ary of 
Mr. Roosevelt's foreign policies, wheth- 
er it be for the betterment 
Government or not? 
I, for one, don’t like to be bullied into 
voting one way or another. I have a 
son in the South Pacific. Don't these 


of our 


gentlemen realize how greatly harassed 
and heavy-hearted 
' 


every mother is 
without adding another burden of 
war disunity? We all want our 
to come back to a united country 
feel that the Congress, no matter 
their party affiliations, should support 
and back whichever man the ple 
have elected. BETTY JUNGER. 


New York, Oct. 25, 1944. 


post- 
toys 
and 
what 


ne 
, 


Not a Matter for Sweden 
Stockholm Not Concerned in Award of 
Nobel Peace Prize 


In THE NEW YorkK TIMES of Oct. 26 
a telegram from Stockholm stated 
the Nobel Foundation 
mended to the Swedish 
| that no peace prize should be awarded 
for this year. 
| Permit me to point out that 
must be some slight misunderstan 


2 


St 


hat 


| To THE Epiror or Tus New York Times: 
| 


had 


re mm. 


Govermment 


— 
ang. 
CcAae- 
t has 
anything to do with the awarding of 
| the peace prize. Incidentally 
Swedish Government has not 
|} SOever to do with the distribution 
any Nobel prize. The prize in 
ture is awarded by the Swedish Acad- 
| emy; the medical prize is awarded by 
the Karolinska Institutet in Stockh 
The prize in physics is awarded by the 
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 
The peace prize is awarded in Oslo 
by the Nobel Peace Prize Committee 
appointed by the Norwegian Parlia- 
| ment. The prize has not been awarded 
| since 1938, when it was given to the 
Nansen Office for Refugees in Geneva. 
| The last person to be awarded the 
| prize was Viscount Cecil in 1937. The 
prize for 1939 was reserved for event 
distribution in 1940, but 
| candidates in 1939 and 1940 was f 
eligible by the Nobel Peace Prize Com- 
mittee. Since 1940 no 
‘been proposed. 
Parliamentary groups, acade 
arts and sciences, a number of learned 
societies and all recipients of a Nobel 
prize have the right to nominate candi- 
dates and bring their names before the 
Nobel Peace Prize Committee. 
When the prize is not awarded 
| amount of the prize is added te 
| capital, and so will increase the val 
of the prize in future years 


in 


| Neither the Nobel Foundation in 


the 
hing what- 
~# 


litera- 





iAL 
none of th 


a 
rd 
Asne 


candidate has 


mies of. 


the 
the 


12 


C. J. HAMBRO, 
Parliaments 
Peace Prize Com- 


President, 
Member 
mittee. 

| New York, Oct. 26, 1944 


Norwegian 
Nobel 


Point of Departure Sought 
To THE Epitor or THe New Yorx Tres 
Regarding Mr. Petrillo, your edito 
rial of Oct. 12 was very clear on two 
points: (1) Having used str 
tactics on Mr. Avery to enforce a War 


vata 


g-arm 


tion should have used the same meth- 
ods on Mr. Petrillo. (2) The 
of Petrillo’s demands will be a tax on 
the public on every recording, not for 
the public treasury but for Petrill 
treasury 

How to accomplish the first result, 
desirable as it might be, is not cle 
Although we might agree on 
might be desirable carry 
trillo it is difficult to 
to carry him “from.” In 
Mr. Avery the situation w 

To avoid the second result, » 
really the crux of the matter, perhaps 
this is the time for the public to str 
If public patronage 
from any performance in 
musicians took part, the 
themselves might discover 
carry Petrillo “from.” 

FRED C. WooD 


end result 


where 
Mr 


to 
‘to,”’ kn 
the case of 
as 


in reverse 


hich is 


Ae, 
withdrawn 
ch ur 


musi 


were 
whi n 
one 


the place to 


Aid for Blind Needed 
| To THe Epitor or THe New Yor« Times 
Today the number of blind civilians 
| registered with the New York Associa- 
| tion for the Biind is 4,059, twenty tim 
| the number of blind service men 
are under the jurisdiction of the 
| ernment for complete rehabilitation 
community problem in New York is 
| much greater. To -3rry on our program 
for the very young blind, the employa- 
ble blind and the very old we need 
port. 
And every year nearly 500 blind come 
| to the Lighthouse asking us to help 
them with the difficult task of “learn- 
ing to be blind,” learning to eat, to 
| dress, to walk alone, to work without 
| sight. It can be done, but it takes 
money to carry on our many-sided pro- 
| gram for the blind. Every dollar will 
|help. Please senii what you can to 
| Thomas S. McLane, treasurer, The 
New York Association for Blind, 
| 111 East Fifty-ninth Street 
| EDITH S. DILWoRTH 
Chairman, Women's Executive Com- 
mittee. 
New York, Oct. 23, 1944 


2s 





who 
Gov- 


Our 


sup- 


the 


ALL SOULS’ MUSIC 
Now is a music of all souls made mani- 
fest: 
Death-silence breaks where there is 
grace to hear it; 
A blanch garland woven of far sighs 
tossed earthward 
To the winds, Christ-uttered symbol 
of His Spirit. 





| Bear, winds, this wreath, circling the 
ghostly firmament, 
Troubling all deeps and shallows of 
complacence; 
Its bloom telling of the Dove 
brooding, murmurous, 
Evermore, evermore calling His own 
unto renascence. 
j ANN& YOUNG, 


low- 





WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. Piseak "ad 


DR. JOHN A. VIETOR, Wot 4 HAMMOND—Dr Breaths The New York REICHBAC yp pee 


i i Athletic Club records its deep sorrow in the 1008, F. and A. M.. sorrow? es 
Retired Jersey City Teacher} death on Oct. 30, 1944. of its beloved mem assing of its b a t M se 
| 
| 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, 


— — eee — — 


ve ved t 
ber, Dr Graeme M. Hammond, a member ces today, 1 P| M.. Park West Chapei 
of many of its prominent . committee ry West 7T9t St 
former member of its Board of Governors LOUIS KIRSTEIN. Maste 
and its President from 1916.to 1920 rhe PAUL JAYSON,. Secretary 
profound aqmeetne of the Club is extended | KEMINGTON—Gey, 24 Licut 

ar f - 


JERSEY CITY. Oct 31—Miss| to his stricken mily. Members are re- Oyster Bay. Long Isiand 


MISS CROSMAN DIES; amare HARRY M. EDWARDS, 
A LEADING ACTRESS pr". "BROOKLYN BANKER 


r 
|Lincoln Savings Trustee, 77, a Former Staff Member at the) 4 dele Cox, who retired as a teacher 
; 90th St.. New York, at 3 P Remington, son of Mme. Ruth de Zerma 


SURGEON, WAS 60) Had Headed State Group 


Special to Tus New Yoru Times 


Former Stage, Screen Star Is . 
Stricken at 83—Won Success Ji. #eeee a Dies—Medical Service Firm's 
in Shakespearean Roles | ® ’ Head; Also Civic Leader 


. } A, 
; lin local public schools in 1932, died| Rest. 2 East ew se a 
New York Hospital Dead— . | ILBERT B, J. FRAWLEY, Presiden brothe ; aH a 
tes yesterday at her home, 15 Virginia) exaier P. SCOTT. Secretary , Ge teen we eo 
, > i itv HAMMOND—Dr. Graeme M. The Board of Dt- of the Chureh of the Heavenly Rest. $ 
Once Anatomy Instructor | Avenue ’ this city. rectors and The Medical Board of The New Ave ind 90th. St Frida Nov 3. at 
Miss Cox was a past president York Post-Graduate Medical School and Hos P.M. Please omit flowers 
of the New Jersey Educational As-| »ital, mourn the loss of Dr. Graeme M. Ham- | RICHARDSON—Ida, Oct 30 1944, deloved 
, mond, who was a valued member of the jaughter of the late Ma Jane and Je 
Special to Tus New Youx Tues Dr. John A. Vietor, well known|S0ciation and Ans “ere lea a eatin te THe cod ned teen Protener | femmerenem. Service ot Walter B. Cushe, 
ROCKVILLE CENTRE, L. L,/ « |surgeon, died yesterday at the p rere tev rom od meh h 4 Emeritus of Neurology and Consulting Neu day. 8 P.M 
2 , | aaa , istrict. e organize e€ Schoo rologist since 192 ' ROSENBLATT—Albert, beloved husband 
Oct. 3l—Harry M. Edwards, ig : A | EDGAR H. BOLES rg ~~ By fe 
Pet |New York Hospital, where he had/woman's Club of New Jersey Pres. of The Board of Directors. | [ate Tena. devoted father of mix, Be 


trustee and chairman of the fi- |been an interne, later assisting at-|twenty years ago, heading the| WALTER T. DANNREUTHER MD elt tena 
‘y - i Chairman of The Medical Board 
ROSENFELD — Hermine, beloved wile 


nance committee of the Lincoln| Ri” ; ¢ Wer | tending surgeon and for years un-|group for six years. Twice Miss) yaymonp—Dr. Graeme M. The New York #OSENFELD — Hermine, beloved wile of * 
Savings Bank of Brooklyn, presi- = ‘ til his retirement in 1940 associate|Cox was president of the Jersey) Neurological Society at e meeting of its Exe pr Rage Rg a 
utive Council on Oct. 31, 1944, learned wit! N. J., and Edwin Rosenfeld of Les Angele 


dent of the New York Medical| a - |attending surgeon. His age was g0,|City Teachers’ Club, which she profoyna regret of the death of its senior! Cait’ Services Wednesday. Now lat 
helped organize, and she also; member, Dr. Graeme M. Hammond. He had) pow at “The Riverside.” 76th St.-Amster- 


Service Company in Brooklyn and} Bo . 
. J ead : rn in Brooklyn the son of . } been a member of this society since 1880, and py 
jlong a civic and religious leader in| 4 George F. and Ar Mr z Achelis V lserved as. director of the Jersey) served it faithfully these many years, We are) 2am Ave 
wee that b } lied of h t at a - 2% inte cnells 1") crit teachers’ organization | gure that his loss will be greatly feit by his 
vives. 1a orough, died of a heart at- ‘tor, Dr. Vietor was a descendant) ~!*Y C & . . | professional fellows, as well as by his many| Milton, H.. devoted meet End Mans 
Henrietta Foster Crosman was a tack today in his home at 32 Irv- jof Frederick Vietor and Thomas ~ a ; oe Dr. BYRON STOOKEY. Pres. and Amsterdam Ave., Wednesday, Nov. 1. a: 
seasoned veteran of the Broadway jing Place, His age was 77. , |Achelis, who founded a leading} Births | Zt. PETER O. DENKER, Secy MONS 
stage before she won stardom in Born in Brooklyn, Mr. Edwards lfirm of textile factors in New| , |HAMMOND—Graeme M. | fficers and Sed Be Tae Bat not pet het resi- 
Rie ’ : . : NRE % Mrs seoh E -| Oo aduceus "08 merica .egion 7 - ——. . cos sets “ 
October, 1900, playing the role of % : ; | studied Lg mg eters becom- |York in 1828. His father. also had | eeeaaIC er and Mrs, Joseph Ehren. | are requested to attend’ funeral services of beloved wife of the late George J. mether, 
iin t. 2 yur loved Past Commander. Services at alter J. and the late George T Simons 2 
g a clerk for the atts Parker lbeen the head of the business. birth of 8 = Robert Jay, Oct. 29, at] one chapel of the Church of the Heavenly posing Fox Funeral Home, 98-07 Ascan 
Doctors Hospita on Wednesday Forest Hills. Requiem Mass at Our a7 


Nell Gwynne in the hit “Mistress! ; . : ’ 
Nell,” which was staged at the old| HENRIETTA CROSMAN |Company, New York ship chan- HARRY M. EDWARDS Dr. Vietor was graduated from|mimscuudehetieut. Emanuel Hirschhorn and| Rest, 90th *St. and Sth Ave Forest Hills. Requiem 
Bijou Theatre. This play was one| ee idlers. After a year with the Parker . | Yale in 1907 and received his M.D.| M's. Hirschhorn (nee Kunstler) announce the Mov. 2, at 3 P.M ww. DEPPING. M.D orest Hills, Thursday. 10 A M- 
| firm, he went to Wililam Vogel : : ae ¥ es Sone Stephanie Helen ad Commande: : | SOLOMON—Adolph (Teetsie devoted br 
syingein i0spie | ROBERT R. GERSTNER, of Sigmynd. Jack, Benjamin, Sidney. Milt 


which she and her second husband, | | degree from th si 
s R > e College of Physi- 
= e C , Bros., Brooklyn, manufacturers i ; KOYLE—Mr. and Mrs. Frederick T, Kayle an- c : ) wom 
and, Housice Campbell, had seven) HOUSANDS ATTEND of sheetmetal products, where he cians and Surgeons, Columbia Uni-|"nounce the birth of a son, Frederick Turner| saumonm ‘be Graeme M._ ‘The “Veterans at| aeeth. "Sucen wen tb a ee 
a j j versity, in 1911. He was an in- Koyle Jr., on Oct. 25, 1944, at New York the New York Athletic Club” record with! Riverside 16th St.-Amsterdam A ; 


enough money to buy and produce! 
jremained for thirty-five years, Hospital and Mrs. Theodore J.| Profound regret the death on Oct. 30, 1944,|STIMSON—HMarry B., Jr 
. ab President,| AAF. died in airplane crash 


while she was playing in Pitts- structor in anat 
s omy at the college) rosENBERG—s x ' 
burgh. Major Campbell a one- |When he left the Vogel concern in f th i > y uJ | eee "ae denn Jacobs) announce the} Of their late geqnemte and tome e F : — 
. 1923 he was vice president an rom e time he completed his in-| arrival of @ son, on Oct, 31, at Harkness| D* Greeme R Hammond Members are re 30, 1944, at Greenville, Miss i 
. + ° . " - este O84 enc une service ednesday.| son of Henry an I bel 3 j 
| terneship until 1917. In 1916 he) Pavilion - Nov 1, at the Church. of the Heavenly Rest Rye N. Y “Memorial "eervice 





Henrietta Crosman, one of Broad- 
way’s leading stage actresses in 
the first two decades following the 
turn of the century, and later a 
film player, died yesterday in her 
home at 908 Edgewood Avenue, 
Pelham Manor. She had been ill 
for nearly a year. Her age was 83. 
A son, Maurice Campbell Jr., sur- 


‘ 





| SMRIER—Mannah J., deloved wife of the late 
Milton H.. devoted mother of Pauline Ga 





time peng, ed reporter and press sales manager 
agent, who later w ibiti ‘ , ; | 2 9th St.. New Yor : 
g t as prohibition —— became assistant attending sur- | 2 Bast QOBERT H GOFFE. Sr, President ashy SE 


administrator here, became her 
manager. nich gell aeak H 

Mies Creemen. whose mother which sells medical care. His con- atte : 

— - ’ of : ; : : ending surgeon. fevoted father of Julius. Services Thursday,| announces with deep regret the death. on| and Lott teh Ff tn . 
was a relative of the composer, 4t Impressive Service for [nection with the bank began about) Navy Dies—Was Admitted to | ie was a Fellow of the Ameri-| 1.00 A. Me at “The Riverside.” 76th St-| Oct 30, 1048, of ity charter member and nat | and Lottie Thatcher, Reposing 
| : e same time. . . » | Amsterdam Av. commander, Col. Graeme } ammon Wednesday Services at 
Stephen Collins Foster, was born| Primate of England Mr. Edwards was a past presi- Bar of His State in 1886 can College of Surgeons and 4|aiseki—safie, charter member Netherland | WILLIAM A. MENZEL, Commander | Church. Bay Ridge, 734 St 
on Sept. 2, 1861, .n Wheeling, W. P P member of several medical and| Lodse. No. 904, F. and A. M. Brethren are| ROBERT CONDON, Adjutant |. vard, Wednesday. 2:30 P 

. requested to attend Masonic Services Thurs- | HAMMOND—Graeme M. Kane Lodge, No. 454 Greenwood Cemetery 


Va. Her father, Maj. George H. _— eT a = = of the Brooklyn Rotary Club, SL surgical societies and also a mem- day, Nov. 2, 11:30 A, M., Riverside Memorial F. and A. M., announces with profound sor VAN BUSKIRK—Arther F.. Oct 31 

Crosman, a West Point man, com-| CANTERBURY. 0 $1 (R a charter member of the Williams- ber of the Racquet and Tennis) Chapel. 76th St. and Amsterdam Ave. : row the death of Brother Hammond ~~ Oct loved husband of Anna Tisch, father of 
‘AN . a -! > . j LI IV PP) MILTON MOS ITZ, Master. . 1944 OHN COWIE, Master Marcus. Services Frid 10 A. M.. Frank = 

A ct ou burgh Luncheon Club, in Brooklyn, BUR NGTON, Vt., Oct. 31 ( Club, the Leash, the Westminster | MILTON BROWN, Secretary WALTER MACK. Secretary Campbell, The F snerel Charen. lac “Mad 


manded the Army post in Wheel- 
ing. a jter)—-The great clock of Canter-|a former vice chairman of the board|—Judge Charles H. Darling, dean|r one] Club and the Piping Rock |AUEGAERT—Pyt. Peter F., U.S. A.. killed | MERMAN—Corp. Leroy, on Oct. 28. at Walter | | son ‘Ave.’ aust. St 
E he bury Cathedral struck noon today|of managers of the Eastern Dis-|of the legal profession in Vermont | cup a 8 Pe Ress General Wesgeal, ‘Weetagen, D.C. vistoe—vehe A. i Di beloved | hushe 

Played in “White Slave jas the coffin of the Archbishop of/trict Branch in Brooklyn of the! and Assistant Secretary of the He ] aa A M | Homer St.. Newton Centre. Mass. Requiem) Herman. Funeral private Capt. John A. Vietor USA. and | 
e leaves a widow, rs. Ruth | High Mass Sacred Heart Church, Newton | HERTER—Anna, Oct. 30, 1944, beloved mother] Edward N. Townsend Jr. at New York Hos 


She finished her education in Canterbury, Dr. William Temple, | Young Men’s Christian Association,; Navy under President Theodore Withington Vietor, his second), Centre, Saturday, Nov. 4. 9 A.M of Carl Herter and Mathilda Eisele. Funeral| pital, on Oct. 31, 1944. Funeral 
Wheeling, but thereafter found it|¥@5 lifted by eight non-commis- . beloved! service Thursday, 1:30 P. M., at Lasch Fu-; St Bartholomew's Chapel, Park 


Shortly afterward Mr. Edwards : 
geon on the hospital staff. Nine) Deaths |  AMBROSE R. CLARK. Secretary | THATCHER—Suddenly, om Oct 30. 1944, Cha 
| HAMMOND—Graeme M. Tne New York Ath-| cey F beloved husband of Agnes I ey 


Dignitaries of Church, State! cined the medical service company,| Fy. Agsj re. 
8 . Ex Assistant Secretary of the youse later he became associate) | sent—satte, beloved husband of Mamie, letic Club Post No. 754, American Legion,} voted brother of Mrs. Harry 





\a former member of the board of| Roosevelt, died here today at the BARBER—Florence M. (nee Howe), 
| wi . | omen . y wife; a daughter, Mrs. Edward N.|" wife of H. Forrest Barber, sister of William} neral Home, 154 East 88th St.. New York| Sist St.. on Thursday, Nov. 2 
necessary to earn her own living | Sioned officers of the army to the;managers of the Long Island|Mary Fletcher Hospital. His age Townsend Jr., and @ son, Capt.| 4 Herbert ‘Howe. Services. at Walter “3. | city ee ae ce ) Please ‘Sait flowers paid, Ot 8: b M. 
"= a] . . 5 , « ” . . . = tn ome 17 ~ 72d § | = 1 > 7 he } , co 
and decided to become an actress. high treaties before me — cower dl oo 4 a trustee of thei was 2. |\John A, Vietor Jr., an Army pilot Friday as me ee " ¥ 7 cosine ye — of ‘Martha Serveens WEIL—Lester L., beloved husban 
She was 16 when she went to | ns the funeral service the bell wy dy lyn Faith Home for Incura- - ais lattached to the Ninety-eighth specare Falls and Canton, N. Y., paper a West Chapel oe St.. Columbus Ave Arbuckle Cong, soe of Ray A., de 
ay 8 ¢ > yi j j > 7 | . ease copy Wednesday, 10:30 A. of Clarence M.. Florence M. Sch 
|the central tower tolled away the|bles and a former vice chairman of} Born in Woodstock, Vt., the 80! | Bomber Squadron, who was shot akunansi bescmen Nathan, devoted father of | HOPFMANN—Entered into rest, Frederick Hoff-| hannah L Hartmann on Cet. 2. 
Max and David, beloved grandfather of; mann of 664 East 223d St.. dearly beloved sonic and B. P. O. E. funeral 


Pittsburgh to enlist the aid of a 
minutes. the New York Area of the B j - : ; : 
oe = eonsiat Jason L. and Ellen L. Poul Dar down over Germany mn February Leonard and Bernard Services today, 3:15| husband of Katherine ‘nee Sattler) and de- the Schaffner Funeral Home, 119-50 Met = 
Serv- politan Ave.. Kew Gardens. Nov. 1. at4aP 


great-uncle, Morrison Foster, who! } a ; i= 
Archbishop Lord Lang of Lam-jof . Religious Education of the ling, Judge Darling received an and has been reported a prisoner| PM. at “The Riverside,” 76th St.-Amster-| voted father of Howard W. Hoffmann 
j dam Ave ces this Wednesday evening, 8 o'clock, at | WHITHAM—Edmund 5., f 16 Kensington 


was in the theatrical business. Her + Bel . 
beth, the first primate to outlive|Methodist Episcopal Church. He|A. B. degree from Tufts College in of war by the War Department. | peutak—Charies M., an Oct. 31, 1944. brother| Herrlich Brothers Concourse Funeral Chapel.| Ave.. Jersey city, beloved husband of Grace 


rawford S 


uncle sent her to the late John A. ' , : 
his successor in the long history of |also was a former trustee and Sun-/1884 and was honored with the de- |The son and daughter are children| of Frederick Bellak Services at Universal} 2169 Grand Concourse (near 1824 St.) Fu H. (nee ¢ 
Chapel, Lexington Ave. at 52d St.. on Fri-| neral Thursday, 2 o'clock Interfent Wood ft Volk Mortuary 
M boker n Frida t 


Ellsler, who was then manager of | 
the church reaching back to St,/day School superintendent of St.|gree of LL. D. by it in 1903. He a : 

the Grand Opera House in Pitts- : a & : . of the doctor’s first wife, the for-| day at 2 P law i 
Augustine, spent his eightieth|John’s Methodist Episcopal Church,|was admitted to the bar in 1886, - i . 'UMLEY—Lou her | HOLMS—E1i ¥ widow of the late| Saturday at 10 

; P v} P p mer Eleanore W oodward, who died nr an Pate ave Rey 6 | es ee + — mi = ~' unt pmo y Pp r r. 


burgh. He gave her a minor role 
- ; i , is i- | Brooklyn. , i j : ‘ es 
as Letty Lee in 8 play written by ap 0 Bt aheneen ies; He had resided in Rockville Cen Fifteen yeara pang oe By the in 1006. A “Mates, Mrs. J. Lote) i ena: Oo tase ok ann aes | © en ee ee ee |e ee 
} q é s >» - . 4 Services at thé Chapel o adison ve W. Davis Jr Mrs J. C. MeChristie. Ruth Hyn native of We 
berger of St. Louis, and a brother, Presbyterian Church, Madison Ave., at 73d L Holms and the late Clarence A. Holms ty “County Clare 


Bartley Campbell, “The White : ‘ 
¥ ’ es ‘e 1930. , , , ‘ ; L t 
Slave,” which played at the Wind- A frail, almost ethereal, figure in| tr since 1 30. He leaves a widow, | Village of Bennington in 1895 and George F. Vietor of New York, | St. Wednesday. 1:30 P.M ‘ a Ek Penmeniccervien ot, en emerdl Meme, |. tele of how task 
sor Theatre in the Bowery miter and cope of old rose, white| Mrs. Gertrude B. Edwards; a son,|a member of the Vermont General | 2)... survive BURGER—Mary, beloved wife of Joseph. Serv-| 91 Boston Post Road. Larchmont, Thurs-| of United States Pe 
: , 4 V. E é s of y j -O7 , -| , ces Thursday, D ut ‘The River-| day. Nov. 2. at 2 P. M mother of Lieutenant 
Then came several years of and gold, he made no address, but/l. V. Edw ard of Rockville Centre, | Assembly in" 1896-97. He was As-| A funeral service will be held in|, side,"’ 76th St. and Amsterdam Ave KERRIGAN—Peter, suddenly, Oct. 30, beloved United States Navy 
’ : shared in reading the lesson from/and a half sister, Mrs. Florence|sistant Secretary. of the Navy) ,.. |BURPEAU—Oscar. on Oct. 30. 1944, at Yon- and of the late Anastasia (nee Mahoney Edward and Harry iM 
barnstorming and some lean days th Ss d E ist Mitchell of St. P t b F! if 1901 t 19 x ithe chapel of St. Bartholomew's kers, N. Y beloved husband of Suzanne r r of William and Mrs, Marie Kerrigan and the late Pat c 
in New York before she was en-|a; tno pistie of Paul to the; Penibatan etd 7 @ 1905. iChurch, Park Avenue and Fifty-| Bernard, father of George. Oscar and Wil-| Smith. Funeral Friday from The Hodnett and Catherine Blake 
ud ‘ . €N-| Corinthians beginning “For which In 1905-14 Judge Darling was) : 7” | Mam. Funeral service McGrath & Son Fu-| Funeral Home, 1260 Shakespeare Ave., Bronx. dence. 107 Rochelle S$ 
gaged by the late Augustin Daly), é : ‘ol first Street, tomorrow morning at! neral Home, Bronxville, N. Y.. Friday, 1) Requiem Mass St. Angela Merici Church, 163d) 9-30 A.M. Solemn 
; ed —_ cause we faint not; but though our CHARLES M. BELLAK Collector of Customs for the Dis-/9.9 pla, Eeteesens Walle Plates fal Game-| Greens Meee bee 1 A i. eet | Ge beet et ee 
for his famous stock company. She! outward man perish, vet the in- . trict of Vermont. Later he served|”’'””’ tery Gate of Heaven A.M. Intermer fH 
P , : CAMPBELL—Henrietta Crosman. Services at) KOKNIGSBERG—Jacob, on Qct 30. devoted \ipDEMANN—Margaret Ann 


t Gate 
Walter B. Cooke Ine Funeral Home, 117 father of Henry Nat Al. Belle. Fiorence eloved daughte { Ade 


scored her first New York success',,, : > : 
~ — “S85 ward man is renewed day by day as president of the American Fi- 
yr ag = Shakespeare's “As You As he spoke the words from the Part Owner of Hotel Brevoort delity Company and a trustee of JOHN J. BURTON Tin alters” Feat Pres Ser Pert West’ hemor a Chap is. war thn yy a. - oe 
ike  o Br preity er Ada Steps of the high altar his voice Operated the Villa Vallee Tufts. He was president of the CONWELL—Edward V., at White Plains N Y St.. Wednesday. 2 P. M N at 2:30 P W 
nowne roadway star, a toe > nightetiedinilie’. <i * iy » ‘ . : Oct. 30. Service at Bennett's Funeral Home.’ KOENIGSBERG—Jacob. Hebrew Home for the) WILDE—G u 
~ Was scarcely audible to the vast | Vermont Bar Association in 1900. Architect Supervised Work on) Sczrsdaic, N. ¥., Wednesday. 2:30 P. M “Aged of Harlem. 116 East 105th St.. ane| Guy, William. Viz 
f its A B. Cooke 


pam. ~ the = of Rosalind q |Goncourse in the nave, but its thin, Charles M. Bellak, part owner| Judge Darling, whose name was | Shanghai University Buildings COOK—Iosephine Hurst, at Lyme, Conn, Oct.| nounees with deep sorrow the passing of | Valte . 1 

I as s 1e pais . : aeenci: | . ; , | $ n her ninetieth ow of l oved ex-presiden acob Koentgsber All 190th St.. Wetnesday. 2 I 

ext MIS rosman joine clear tone was well heard in the and associate manager of the Ho-| under consideration by the Repub- | g liam H. Cook and mother of Mrs. Raiph W directors are requested to attend eee | e WILNER—Corp oo 
Emerson and the late Mary Elizabeth Cook ices today. at Park West Memorial Chape! with profound serrow t 


Daniel Frohman’s Lyceum stock fm tel Brevoor i int ’ ‘ 
: choir, where sat representatives of revoort, Fifth Avenue and|licans for the Governorship of Ver- see ite ee | E ind the | E ! oday. est ith 
company and appeared in & num- almost every sphere of public lite,|Bighth Street, who had been in the|mont in 1818, was State director! vowimRs N.Y. Oct, 31—|_fuletgiemg. ou tien conn, 3 | SN MAbs citi, medent. Sree of 
ver of successful plays wi such Thirty Bishops ini set hotel business in this city f of the American Red Cross Christ- uD, aN. ” - i= Please omit flowers ISAAC SBIRA. Executive Director NOAH BE 
- _ ag ‘ S15 s, iding two from y tor many ™m ris y itect ; DANNENBERG—Roslyn. United Order True) KOENIGSBERG—Jacob. The members of the 
well-known players as E. H. Soth-\the United States, attended. A|Ye@rs, died yesterday in St. Vin-|mas membership drive in 1917 and |John J. Burton, an architect and | Sisters. Washington. No M1, sorrowfully an-| Synagogue of the Y. M. and W. H. A. $01 LEO GOLDFINGER, Se 
ern, Herbert Kelsey, Effie Shan- esowd of several thousand stood cent’s Hospital after a brief ill-|of the Third Liberty Loan drive in a Canadian Army veteran of the! nounces the passing of Worthy Sister Roslyn| rowfully announce the death of its beloved/ wRiGHT—Anna Murray 








i 





ways 
and 


ot 


Thi r : inion D ber Worthy Grand Lodge and I funeral, Park West Memorial Chape we pe ' her . 
non, Mrs. Thomas Whiffen and/pareheaded outside the cathedral, meSS at the age of 62. Born in|Vermont during the first World First World War, in which he) sisters of Wasnington 21 kindly attend funeral Tis Weat "oth st Wednesday. 2 P.M. —_ i aE 
4 acke 7 1e . . , ¢ : - - ie : ie > rvices W a } st End Fu-| SAMUEL <LEIN. P ent 8 _ . — 
James K. Hackett. wolowed an) The coffin of plain oak bore in| AUStria, he had lived in this coun- War. He also served as president |S¢rved , m egg pred Gied here neral ‘Chapel. "200° West vist st. MAX MACNOFSKY " sccoctaty err saat 
engagement with Charles Froh- ° ' try since childhood of the Vermont Society of the Sons|S@turday in St. John’s Riverside SARA ZAUDERER, President. | KOHN—Carrie, beloved sister of Bertha Louise 
“aston ; black lettering the simple inscrip-|***_> ° Are ‘Hospital. His < ras 57. He DANNENBERG—Roslyn, beloved wife ©| Kohn. daughter of the late Hezekiah and : 
man, and she = ecame the tion, “William Temple, D. D., died Fifteen years ago Mr. Bellak, as of the American Revolution. | dea ab 16 — ais aa math . ro Emanuel, devoted sister of Elsie Rocker| Jouyjge Kohn, sister of the late Harry, Sol Tn Memoriam 
; é f > orgs La~ - “gaia f »side , ras § i ‘ | ayley Av e. -| Samuel Newfield and Dora Feinberg. Service . He Puner ‘ * ~ $e : 
wage. Hg he S Caen Oct. 26, 1944, aged 63 years.” a President of the Ruvall Orchestra! The judge was a thirty-third de-|5 “ servic y held thal wrt at "The West End.” Slst St. and Amsterdam| Annette and Henriette Kohn, eee a st EICKS—Casper H. In beloved memory 
ion which was known as Charles 1 -5ie and gold cathedral pall was|CoTporation operated a night club/gree Mason, and in 1914-16 was|neral service was he is after-| Ave. Wednesday, Nov. 1, at 2 P.M. Thursday, Nov. 2. Ii A.M mand and father, WIFE. 
Frohman’'s Comedians . at 10 Kast & thich|Grand Master /noon, DANNENBERG—Roslyn. The Seligman Solo- | ,LaANDEY—Dora, wile of the late Abraham J B. we met. 
or a . draped over the coffin. Surmount- at vast Sixtieth Street which | Gran Master of Masons for his| . , mon Society, alumni of the Hebrew Orphan devoted mother of Eva Landey, Miriam Linen- | GO.Lps TEIN Ber se In | 
One of her outstanding successes ing it was the Archbishop's pas became widely known as the Villa| State. He had also served as na-| Born in Garden City, L. I, Mr.| asylum, prektetfully records the Passing Of! thal. Estelle Strongin and Lovey Landey | “devoted hush > 
, “ “a ” 4 s s S pas-|,, ; rr Ht ‘ , Rosl} nnenbderg, wife of our Financia rvices from home 22 East 65th St.. Thurs-| “wire MINNIE: child M 
at this time was “Gloriana,” in tome ated? Vallee and was the scene of Rudy| tional president of the Zeta Psi|Burton was graduated from the) eye ee etP peanenbere Services: at seretnes Seth Bae. 25 ee So St u Wite | MINNIE. | _childre M 
which she played with Tom Wise, Near the bier sat the family Vallee’s first great siftcess. Mr.| fraternity. |\Carnegie Institute of Architecture The c. at End,” 91st St and Amsterdam |; ERKOWITZ — Morris, beloved husband of | yeapAtbieLbcBeos & Adored wife, mothe 
, -- , . J ‘ 4 , | aah : , j i y > ide ; Ave, Wednesday, 2 P. } Fred fevoted father of Louis, Joseph. A ndmoth: Rest peace 
opin an ens, Otis Harlan and mourners and the Archbishop's Vallee appeared there from March,| He married in 1889 Miss Agnes |!" Pittsburgh. Forme rly identified | neu, DEANCHE MIRKEN, President fred, Michael. Alma and Blanche. Services uhcusTEn Wiliam mice in ng memor 
May Robson. widow. Among those who attend-| 2929, until the Villa was closed in|C. Norton, who died in 1941, Three |With architectural firms in Mane) | Serre oeiier and members of Men-| rare West.” Teth-Columbus Ave. Wednes- , eae 
Triumph as Rosalind ed were Clement Attlee, Deputy| Pil, 1931 |daughters were born to them. jhattan, he spent six years as @|  Geissohn Benevolent Society are requested t0/ LEOPOLD—Helle, on Oct. 31. beloved wite of o yy ee yee 
‘ ~ ¥ 3ellak aves ris i : j attend the funeral services for yn M-| the late Samuel, devoted mother of Birdie : Poe ROGERS FAMII 
She and her first husband, Sed-|Prime Minister, and Anthony Mr. Bellak leaves a brother, supervising architect on buildings! Oibers, ‘wife of our financial secretary.| Rich “and Rita, Rosenfeld. darling srand-| ciwngpaNp<tée. In moa 2S 
‘ \ , | Bev . , . | Frederick Bellak. for the University of Shanghai. | Emanuel Dannenberg, at “The West End." mother of Marion Priedman and Samuel|”\otner Nov. 1. 1942. Always h 
ley Brown, a stage director, were|Bevir, private secretary, represent- | . T He leaves a widow. Mrs. Helena| ¥st St-_and Amsterdam Ave., Wednesday,! Rosenfeld. Services Park West Chapel, 79th CAMUEL, MAURICE. FREDERICK. ROSE 
divorced and she was married to|im& Prime Minister Winston - —-- Me . : | Nov. 1, at 2 P.M. . ; St. and Columbus, Thursday, Nov, 2, at 2:30) FRANCES, IRWIN. GEORGE 
+ ert en | Churchill JOHNR MAGARV . |Meyer Burton, formerly of Buffa-) LEOPOLD S. BERENDT. President P.M : , ¥ : = — — 
Major Campbell. After achieving urcnill, . EY Head of Insurance Firm Once | jo: two brothers. Charles O Bur- | EDWABRDS—Harry M., on Tuesday, Oct. 31 | LEOPOLD—Belle. Unity No 6 United Order —— “~~ 
a triumph in “Mistress Nell.” she| At the end of the service while ’ , ~o hy | 1944, of 32 Irving Pi., Rockville Centre,| of True Sisters, sorrowfully announces the , encagements may 6¢ telephousd 
mp . at Shake.|the organist played a Bach Choral C. J. Bonaparte’s Law Partner |ton of Toronto, and Philip Burton) Deloved husband of Gertrude V. Edwards, fa-| death of its honorary Truster eelident Rita| Lackawanna 4-1000 until midmight: Newark 
i , , ° ; aye : " -Vi ; : | ienas . ; ther of L. V. Edwards. Service a e Fair-' mother of the Worthy Grand President nr. ao “foe a oe ae Bet 
red ate = Sean Prelude. the coffin its pall re Ex-Vice President of American a |of Rochester; five sisters, Mrs, child Chapel Franklin Ave. at 12th St., Gar- Rosenfeld and Worthy Sister Birdie Rich te P pees — Lo >? f. 2. 
’ ul “ajor 4 , 7 " : . . . | : . Tur New ¥. . j g den City, Thursday, 8:30 P. M Funeral services Thursday at 2:30 P. M exday ee eee a” @-3 on 
Campbell] as the producer. moved by four King’s Scholars in Locomotive Dies in Florida ge m obatpenh yh pple {Otis B. Birdsall of Detroit, Mrs. A. |EDWARDS—John'S., on Oct. 31, 1944, beloved| Park West Memorial Chapel. 115 West Toth $t.| chester, White Pistne Gi00. 9:30 4. 
In 1962 she appeared here and|White surplices, was taken in slow BALTIMORE, Oct. 31—Paul M,|W. Ambrose, Mrs. John R. Rowell ot ditt © ae al Tomes ren ona LEVY—Gustavu pik con of Beka Gane) P.O neola, Garden City 9800. 9:30 4 
e : ‘ é . r y a ’ . ‘ , j re ‘pe ¢ ic 0 u yrother of rherese Josepn el —is Us ., Ss . =r ss . ‘ Phar ) an rid t 
was acclaimed as the foremost/Pprocession to the west door. Mrs AVON PARK, Fla., Oct. 31 (P) Burnett, chairman of the board of|4nd the Misses Frances and Alice Desens * wuneral from Richard J, Delaney| Jennie (nee Williams Se vices ‘Thursda ; } sdays and Fridays, 34 
- _ ames) * : . hn Rav avarvev mer : 7? 7 . , ami , 2 Vest h St ry 10 A. M t ‘The Riverside 76th St 
Rosalind of her time. She played Temple walked immediately be John Raymond Magarvey, former|the Monumental Life Insurance|Burton, ell of Hamilton, Ont. runergl Home, x FF a> Fr iday , eR 
3 or 1 rhte at the hind it. and at the rear of the long Vice President of the American Lo-|Company and at one time associ- Mrs. Urquhart leaves three sons,} seph’s Church, 6th Ave. and Washington |LEVY—Gustavus. The Board of Directors 
in this role for 100 nights at the 5 on : ' 7 5 C tive C ‘ , ‘ ar ‘" ‘ iR d ‘liff M ‘is George G ‘d Place 9:30 A M Interment Holy Cross D. Strauss Compan) Inc.. and Employes aré 
old Republic Theatre, the record |file of sorrowing prelates came |COmotive Company, died of a heart/ated with the late Charles J. Bo-|Radcliffe Morris, George 7OTGON|  Gomete profoundly saddened the untimely deat 
ee agg ae ; or ang an Ff or ears attack at his home here today. His! naparte . “actice r law.jand William Klemm Beecher! FLEMING-KENT—Dillie, on Oct 23%, 1944,/ of their esteemed employe and friend. We 
in those days for a Shakespearean 1 rd Lang and the Archbishop of age was 83. He was not ees d — nt in the practice of law, Urauhart. all of Philadelphis daughter of the late James E. Fleming and extend ot deepest nd sincerest sympathy W hen 
comedy York aR aS So as not marries died last night in his home here; Urquhart, f phia, | Seabelia Penn. “Funeral service @¢ Universe to the : bereaved famtls | 
‘ . 9 ” Afteru . — . P > ave aw - Chapel, Lexington Ave. at S2d St.. New York STRAUSS. Pi 
“The Sword of the Kin an Afterward the coffin was taken coe i : ‘ at the age of 77 City. on Thursday, Nov. 2. at 10 A. M,|LUTT-~Allen George, suddenly, Oct 1, 1944 { — 
English play, also proved a , he bona to a crematory It passed down Special to THe New Yorw Crumes Mr. Burnett was educated at DAVID W BEAMAN a OF oy ne Philadelphia, Pa.| beloved husband of Blanche, devoted son of = | death OCcurs 
ated pay ’ os ‘ rae ~ ‘ ‘ ; SCHENECTADY, N, Y., Oct. 31) B; re Citv College ; » . | Kindly omit flowers Elizabeth, and brother of Hattie. Reposing 
here and on the road. and as a re-|tlie main street of Canterbury, a M M a } l ene Se ee ERS ‘ |FREEMAN—Dr. Benjamin, beloved husband of 4t Walter B. Cooke, Inc., Funeral Home. 11% oe r 
; : : ‘row diev “ougehfare ir. Magarvey, Who was aiso a/ University arvi: | : ; : t G West 72d St.. until Thursday, 10 P. M. Inter pr ne . 
sult of these triumphs David Be-/|narrow, medic val thoroughfare, Siennheds on aan pe tlh a ey, ¢ , Mary! and Law! Retired New Bedford, Mass., qulia, darting father of Harrist a et foo © TELEPHONE BUTTERFIELD 8-3800 
lasco selected her for the starring where every shop was closed and : — 4 a s1VIC Re Z School. e was counsel for the Utili E ti is Dead and Philip Freeman. Services Wednesday, |McDANIEL—Augusta J., paay on Sunday, ren 
role in his play “Sweet Kitty Bel-|every blind drawn. The burial of “OMS, retired a bout 1930. Mutual Life Insurance Company | ity xecutive is ea u 30 A. M., at “The Riverside,’’ 76th St.- Oct. _Jts.. widow of Williiom, Brissy, and Campbell continues to maintain 
airs.” This was considered one of|the ashes in the Cloister Garth ad- He was manager of the Schenec-!of Baltimore from 1898 to 1920 CINE ny, | pRIEDMAN De Morris, beloved hustand of| M., Orleanor B., and the late Laura F. Mc- one high standard to all patrons 
f joining the cathedral will take t@dy works of the American Loco-|and subsequently a director, vice pee Cases Sn Te, | Mary. devoted father of David. Harold and| Denis. Service i ut se Mn —from your home, church 
the outstanding performances of |) é tive cag: ; : s ’ | NEW BEDFORD. M Oct. 31| Benno, darling grandfather of Lawrence and| | Brooklyn, Wednesday, ut 8 P.M b op 
Miss Crosman’s career place privately tomorrow. motive Company when appointed|president and president. He be- David Web B ass., *» 4| aarle Friedmaan. Services Park West Chapel, | Mck.WEE—Thomas Fon Oct 29 beloved or our chapel 
. 4 . . ; ; . ; ‘ aun “ 9 2 ‘ | » Flo! ro 
Among other plays for which she} consulting vice president in Janu-|came chairman of the board of the rt ebater Beaman, og | PRIEDMAN—Dr, | sombere “a Isaac| residence, 600 West 186th St. Requiem Mass Many fine hardwood and metal 
, “R | ary, 1925. He maintained an office | Monumental Company in 1922, He president of the New Bedford Gas Lodge are requested to attend the funeral,| @t St. Elizabeth's Church, Friday, Nov. 3 caskets still available 
is well remembered were oger | BERNARDO GARCIA in N , ry d Edi Light died| Perk’ West’ Chapel, 29th-Columous Ave.,| at 11 A. M.- Interment, Calvary Cemetery : 8 
Le Honte,” “The Idler,” ‘“Mary,| (also in New York. was a major in the Maryland Na-| 8? laon Light Compangyy died! aurea. lov. 3.4 P. a McGREGOR—Robert Gardner, D.D., on Oct a noe 
“ 7 Oy 4 . — yo tional G if sae b today after a month’s illness. His EMANUEL M. MERBLUM, Pres. | 30, 1944, beloved husband of Lena Lydia @ SERVING ALL RELIGIONS 
Mary, Quite Contrary,” “All-of-a-| \ : lonai Guard for some years be- MO " WEINBERGER. Sec Miller and father of Mrs. G. J. Hamilton 
| Ex-Chief of Cuban Police C d Ww age was 71 RRIS L. WEI , Secy 
Sudden Peggy ” “The Duchess of x-Uniet 0 uban Folice Uause GEORGE E. CUTLEY fore 1916. . i Ci i ti. Mr. B |GALLAGHER—William A., on Oct. 31, 1944.| Mrs. Talbot Curtin, Rumsey ater ond Robert ) 
| G. MeGregor Jr. Services at North Avenue 
“The | Near-Revolt When Removed | Special to Taz New Yorx Tres. He leaves a widow, the former Margy tan a gy = Saieaatend fe lay (4-9) br Aw. Gal-| Presbyterian Church, New ‘Rochelle, oP M RAVK . AMPBELL 
“ f > . : | \ 
” JE ‘ oneal Elizabeth Jackson, and a daugh- lagher. Reposing at 65 East 52d St. Requiem| Wednesday. Interment Hamilton College ; a 
eg eee oan l By Canle to Tes New ZORe Ties E Cutley. oan yy ter, Mrs Stewart H. Clifford 6h) setts Institute of Technology in| Mass ‘st. ‘Patrick's Cathedral, Lady eee | MEVERCPaul A. of 14f-15 Northern Blvd The Funeral Church.” Ine 
° * . ’ 3. 6 Z . ° | s a 's| ME —Pau 5 © 7 5 Ne t ! . . 
: 1896 and joined the local public faolieé bat ine 8 ry Ad Flushing, L. I, om. Tuesday, Oct, 31, 1044 Madison Avenue at Silst Street 
Hollywood, under contract to Fox | tional Flushing, Saturday morning, Nov, 4 at 11} 
1.,,;0f Garcia as chief | wy , a 
“The Royal Family |°! zarcia as chief of police by the| was a graduate of St. Peter’s Col-|his home, 40 Fifth Avenue, after a ried in 1902; a son, David W. Bea-| Soca’ Ave.. Wednesday, 10 A. M 
of Broadway.” , 4 : MOISSON—Mary Hi, beloved wife of Marcel A..|[ Walter 
1937, in 1939 played the r sister of Mary Petrillo, Frank and 
and pay ished. Batista took over command/gon Lieut. George E. Cutley Jr : - : : . 
gon, ' ge . y “T.,| Institute of Technology in 1922.| bridge and Mrs. William Ferris of| on Friday, Nov. 3, at 8:45 A 
4 — an e chief f the navy, Angel), , “lore - . ~ | i brother of Cornelia M. Field, died in the 
five years ago, where she lived with | ne uer of the navy, Angelland the Misses Angela and Clare| widow, Marion Beebe Gray; his| MARCEL M. AUGUSTINE mains reposing at 83-12 , service of his count?’ i rer 
- ; ¥.| twenty-eighth year Memoria! service will be 145 
1 First 
| y r . Albans 
NEW ROCHELLE, N. Y., Oct aboaih Please do not send flowers 165 E. Tremont Ave.—LUdiow 7-27 
50 Seventh A 


Suds,” “Erstwhile Susan,” 











iGarcia, former chief of the Na-lin : WIG iIRAY : 
From 1932 to 1936 she was in| inal cases here for many years, DWIGHT GRAY cian. He became president in 1933 "Cociia father of Mrs. Frank Costello, Mrs.| stead, 147th St. and Northern Boulevard 
duced picture Wednesday, 1 P. M. 
“ » «,|provoked a controversy which} Sa * : 
She had a part in “In Clover” in p y |/York Law School. He leaves a|Masgzg., forty-four years ago, he was granddaughters, and two sisters,| mother of Mary Ann, dear daughter of Anna I 
dence, 114 West 183d St.. Bronx. Solemn DIGNIFIED AsLow 150 
; > or r sé -edrazs y ; 
tired to her Pelham Manor home|Chief of the army, José Pedraza,|senh H. Waters of Yonkers, N. Y.,/ro| Golf Club. Mr. Gray leaves a of Gladys, Frank and Mary Gough, and| son of Carolyn W. and Richard L. Morris | 
grandfather of Thomas 
exile, but later Garcia returned : ' . , . m 3 St 
. ater Garcia returnec a brother, Matthew A. Cutley of|ter Pauline, and a brother, Free- Se oe eS Friday, Nov. 3. at 10} 80m Ave., om Friday, Nov. 3, at 10 A. M 1 West 190th Street RAymond 9-1900 
tine of the Motorcycle Squad, a Marion Beebe, son of Mrs. William Gray. and Oct. 81, 1944, Fune rp at her home BROOKLYN 


MISS FLORENCE M. BOWMAN ERNEST C. 


Special to THe Ntw Yoru Times 
Spec iz New Y K 


DOTY 


for Scandal,” “Getting Married” | HAVANA. Oct. $l--Bernard 
and “Trelawney of the Wells.” | d Al . ct, Jl—bernardo prominent as an attorney in crim- utility the next year as an electri- Pa., papers please copy. Please omit flowers beloved husband of Emma, father of Sylvester © F. B.C. 1944 
GEIGERMAN—Jacob I. husband of the late| C. Meyer, Services at The Hallett Home 
lice : av afte : ’ 
es # saan ¢ ree ae y eg a man today at his home, 123 Gif- Dwight Gray, vice president of| and served until 1940 Henry Mehrman. Mrs. Charles Halbauer, ashi 
; J | SS. , as 4° b ars . — oi - e | q : ’ ii. o'cloc 
oe but noted oxen en she In February, 1941, the removal ore es — porn Pope & Gray, printing inks, 95| He leaves a widow, the former} [{*° “Gelgermen Thervices at Walter B MILLER—Poaline, beloved wife of Arthur, de- 
- a pea? . ’ * . j - va ie re oY . . . , 7 | voted mot of Joan jervices Pa —— ————— 
played a role in the New York-pro y Y|Martin Street, died yesterday at| Jane Witter Stetson, whom he mar-! Cooke, Inc., Funeral Home, 117 West 724 8t.. Memorial Chapel, fet St. ené Columbus 
jthen President, Fulgencio Batista, | ‘ 
, B ‘jlege, Jerse ity, and the New ; é -ELLI— ‘ 
. y . y long ainesa Bora. in Medford, man Jr. of Durham, N. C.; two |@rey oy wife, or Wiulitern: Gains daughter of the late John C. and Sarah/| ° 
ithreatened the island with blood a A la Smith Cutl : Holahan. Funeral Thursday, from her resi- iNCORPORS TED —semeeeneman oo 
| ; “) widow nge ; . sca 0 ¥ 
: : ole : & = - = ey * graduated from the Massa¢ husetts Mrs. Asa E. Goddard of Cam- gg HE Pagliaro Funeral from home Requiem Mass Church of the Sacred Heart, 
of Mrs. Patrick Crowley in the lof the armed forces, ousting’ the! 1gath St.-Shakespeare Ave., Bronx, 11 A. M FUNERALS As 
ro os i -| ‘ ead torces, OUs 'USNR; three daughters, Mrs. Jo- mm ¢ . , . . -| pj GOUGH—Peter J.. on Oct. 31, 1944, beloved| Interment Gate of Heaven Cemetery. — 
play, “Herself.” Miss Crosman re arg t & , |He was a member of the Baltus-| Piedmont, Calif. |“husband of Henfletta Spatz and dear father |MORRIS—Lieut. Richard Lewis, Jr veloved /t/ OUR FUNERAL HOMES 
Gonzalez. All three chiefs fled into! F . one eee. 2 eee Se 117 West 72nd Street—TRafaigat 7-9700 
-in-law. ‘ Cutley of 123 Gifford Avenue, and “ “sg Tillis ‘ray: al : _ - ate 
her son and daughter-in-la y 7 |}mother, Mrs. William Gray; a sis-; Queces we ten tee Gees Tae | at Grand Central Feskwey, yemete, 3 st | held at St. James Church, Tist St. at Madi Avenue—RH 4-5800 
3rooklyn. }man Gray. 31—Patrol M ‘ae Ausus.|enkerienns.’ ca Oct mt, idee, oh Nc peaks |/MUEMEeey “We ideale nonin 
oa “ | ,us- AY—Dw' , or 4 is si L JTER—} Ss - h 
ee atrolman Marce g BA ONO Fifth: Ane beloved husband of| year. wife of Smith L. Multer, on Tuesda 347 Willis Avenue—MOtt Haven 9-02 
MRS. JOSEPH BURGE CHAUNCEY F. THATCHER a3 =e : 
. ‘ ad ° . , ‘helle ic bre of Mis Pauline Gr Services t 245 Turrell Ave South Orange y J ‘ 
member of the New Rochelle polic . a Campbell The. Pune al “Chureh.’ Friday, Nov maw = Interment at! igit Flatbush Ave, 


PLAINFIELD, N. J., Oct. 31- ROSE! ' oi ie ail 
ae Tag "4 . Mrs. Mary Burger, who with her Chauncey F. Thatcher, president | force for twenty-four years, died of! Ine Madison Ave. and Sist St. New York| Worcester. N. ¥ 
J A 1944, slater f 


Miss Florence M. Bowman of 403/500. G. Doty of 927 Chestnut Ms aire 
- re eee se husband, Joseph urger, tounae f Chaunce F. Thatcher Inc. » City, on Thursday. Nov. 2, at 8 P.M. Inter- |MURRAY—Catherine, Oct. 30 QUEENS 
P be a M ; ‘ ‘la heart ailment last night in his ment erivete hs omit flowers Sarah Murray and Mrs. M. Reagan Funeral 150-16 Hiilcide Avenue—JAmaica 6-6670 


East Seventh Street, who retired)... i . department head at th 
« . “ i partme es t ec » ’ ’ , . 7 ’ 
on Oct. 31, 1941, as librarian of the I 3urger’s Bakery, on lower Second) anufacturers of women’s shoes at\home, 79 Brook Street, at the age|GURLAND—Rebecea, beloved wife of the iate| Fox Funeral Home, 203 East 20st St. neat 63-32 Forest Avenue—HEgeman 32-0900 
. . Boris, devoted mother of Claire Grossman.) Concourse, Thursday, 9 A. M. Requiem Mass 158-14 North, Bivd, — Fiushing 3-660@ 











PRANK FAIRCHILD, LICENSED MANAGE® 
86 LEFFERTS PLACE, BROOKLYN 





Kearny works of the Western| ay , itic - : 
: 7 > ] Avenue, atronized by olitical | «: av Stree . , 
public library here after serving | mlectric Company, which he had|jq¢, de Ie > York d P talons Jay Street, Brooklyn, died on of 49. Born in Alsace-Lorraine, he| fgtner Segal, Vera Turk, Diana Turk and] St. Philip Neri Church, 9:30 A. M. Interment STATEN 102Ane 
on its staff for forty-four years, | “0 Se ong hey 0 i: eaders of New or uring >|Monday in his home, 183 Seventy-|wae a private in the AEF during| Harold Gurland. Services Wednesday. 1:45] Calvary Cemetery |] 571 ForestAv.WestBrighton-Gibraitar 2 
died last night in Muhlenberg Hos- | 5°" © for thirty years, died today |early Nineteen Hundreds a8 &D|<o¢ d Street. Brooklyn. after a . eee P. M., at “The Riverside,”’ 76th St. and| MYERS—Gussie, beloved wife of the late Elias. | —_ 3054 
1eG iast nig’ in n zg | x z= ; ~ . }second street, r yn, the first World W He 1 s - , oe ~— ESTCHESTER 
at the General Hospital in Eliza-| pat lace. died yesterday. She'},; 7 le firs or ar. e leaveS &| amsterdam Ave. Interment Mount Lebanon| devoted mother of Lillian and Norman, deat 214 Mamaroneck Avenue—White Plains 39 
pital at the age of 68. She was a beth after a long illness. His age on mp Ay ace, ig y: | brief illness. His age was 70. son, Eugene, and a sister, Mra.| Cemetery in| pater, Of Dolly Foselon. Rowe Ferges and aoe _ 
lifelong resident of Plainfield. iwas 56. Born in Charleston. II! wee Tears Coe. : Mr. Thatcher leaves a widow, Lucy Fischer of New Rochelle. } Society announces with profound sorrow the, and Columbus, Thursday. Nov. 2, at 1 P.M 
Upon her retirement Miss Bow- a5, D ty formert , es an th th - Mrs. Burger was also widely | Mrs. Agnes B. C. Thatcher, and ae an untimely death of its Vice President and Di- PETTERSEN. Suddenly. an Oct 30. Olgarth of | 
: | ( 4 ( erly fas it » . ~ , ’ 7 » Ave rooklyn eloved husband of 
man was made library consultant. |Gen aa : Elect rect Cus oo le - known for her aid to the distressed. |two sisters, Mrs. H. E. W orthing- | MISS ELNA MACFARLANE | servi tae yy Fa | Dagney Pettersen. . Services at Fred Herbst 
Surviving are two sisters, Miss| yee) cine transferred te Kearny|5le, was an honorary member of/ton and Miss Lottie Thatcher, both| TAMI. Via. Oct. 31 (P—Miss| eee, Se ee ores vd) Tena oP i es ie 
“ > > > y ansferre arnv ‘ x i P)— | that “e y h M. rme v 
Ethel Bowman of Plainfield and|”* 924. = neeweree ae “earny Ohab Zedek Sisterhood. She re-|of Brooklyn. MIAME, Via., Oct. 18) family we extend hearttelt’ spunpathy. ‘Mem- | PIERSONS—Henry F., Oct. 30, loved brother Free Booklet 
Mrs. Louise Griffin of Manatee, |!" *%~<*- e was a member of the|siqeqd with her husband at the |Elna Frances Macfarlane, daugh-| bers please attend funeral of Anna Hodgman. Funeral private. « Inter- 
° -} ’ . a eas weal aed 2 7 " iter yi > ¢ ¢ > 7 Mr SE ‘ men ensico Cemetery ’ 
Fla,, and three brothers, Fred er af eneienghiey emacs |Ansonia Hotel. A funeral service) PROF. RUTGER SERNANDER |‘er of Willie Macfarlang, former) (ips anp Rebecca” Ladion Leakue of Beth | PLAUT—Herman. The members of the firm of| YOUR FAMILY’S SHARE IN 
Wilmington, Del.; Harold of West). r. Doty leaves a widow, Millie) wil) be held at Riverside Memorial) Poe. Rutger Sernander. Swedish | °P®® golf champion, diéd in an) Davee Wecmra) saourns Te passing Of cat). Eee us iaaies sat Uleaeis We oe: 
Hartford, Conn., and Martin of - “ae ‘2 es ae wg 3 yo Chapel, Seventy-sixth Street and botanist, died on Friday in Sweden er yar pr the bond to ee’ ties and devotion to our cause will’ forever | tend y the bereaved family our profoundest SOCIAL SECURITY 
ora; a daughter, Miss utn oty sends a . aw ati _— . . , or § y mf sympath 
Reading, Pa Roselle : may is - - o- *|Amsterdam Avenue, Thursday at according to an announcement yes- pital today after suffering a heart) live in our hearts. oY Bay iil int emen. The emsloves 6f Wermen 
= jof Roselle; wo sisters, Mrs. n@) 10:30 A. M | terday here by the American- attack. Her age was 26, Miss Mac- | «y RLAND—Kebecea. Haflem Hebrew Day and Plaut Company sorrowfully recor the pass 
. ~~ ' White and Mrs. Ruth Martin, and — * farlane was , : | Night Nurse ‘noun ith 4 sorrow| ing of their beloved former employer, Her nil 
EDITH VAN STEENBURGH ttt brothers. Garret Bilioti aa Swedish News Exchange. He was ne — Mg lunc Rane her | Nig ce th deep socrow man laut, We extend our heartfelt sym | may . sate Sonal o 
Speciai to Tux New Yor Times Orville Dot Pata Lots ; | WILLIAM H. HULSKAMPER born in Viby, Sweden, seventy-|™0! ler when e was stricken, and rapetnesnses. ur deepest sympathy to| ,patly to the bereaved family. family and 9 claim unds to which 
MADALIN. N. Y.. Oct. 31—Mrs rville Doty. masse to Gain Maw Ghai Sane ‘eight years ago She came to Miami three years Mrs MS. TARSHES, President associates of our dear departed friend our they would not other- 
" 1 San fs Be aera aon _ ' et : * ago from White Plains, N. Y GURLARD—Rebecca. The Riverside Section of} sincerest sympathy. As a business man. he} wise know they were 
Edith Stall Van Steenburgh, de-| MISS HELEN WOODBURN | EAST ORANGE, N. J., Oct. 31—| He was chairman for eighteen . + wears DhetenBior the Women’s League for. Palestine records was 0 leader, in cur industry and a friend) oi eae your copy 
scendant of Lyman Hall, a signer ‘ o ‘ napa ana “ William H. Hulskamper, who re-| years of the Swedish Botanical So- JOHN ELLINGHAM aed ee OS ee ““ENGEL IMPORT CO, write to Dept. H 
‘ s t N : S. : » > I I end.and co-worke a re . ' 
of the Declaration of Independence,; ____ oe tam angio te: tired twenty years ago as treasurer|ciety and was a member of many nines . Mrs. SAMUEL GREENBERG. Chairman. | porrs—soseph, on Aoi DY thee bed he. 
and widow of Walter M. Van Steen:| NEWBURGH, N. Y., Oct. 31—Iof the Spearin Preston Corporation, |foreign scientific groups. Special 10 THE Mew WET Oa NE Meet ep tinul eaananass ie] bene oe ortin koe Pas Ponccslaersce! FAIRCHILD) SONS xc Aderos 
burgh, former pharmacist and mer-| Miss Helen T. Woodburn of New-|New York dock builders, died today ROSELLE, N. J., Oct. 31—John ssing of a beloved’ member and extends| “¢, August Eickelberg's Parlors, 934 8th Ave inc. Morberans 
‘ } “4 NY F ‘ bh passing ember exte (at 56th St.), om Thursday, Nov. 2, at 2 
chant in Red Hook, N. Y., died|burgh, a public school teacher,/at his home, 153 William Street, EDMUND 8S. WHITHAM Ellingham of 1327 Crescent Ave-| er SOE te crt fF alsciy ’ 
Monday in the Northern Dutchess|died in ner nome on Sunday. Born| this city. He was 91 years old. JERSEY CITY, Oct. 31 (#)—!/nue, formerly with the shipping de- | GURLAND—Rebecea, “Home, Hospital, Daugh- Possdey. Oat 31 'ises, — RK 
Health Center in Rhinebeck. She|here, a daughter of Samuel W. and! He leaves a son, J. Warren Huls-|Edmund S. Whitham of 145 Ken-|Partment of the Singer Manufac-! ters of Jace ate oy tal - Mayers Rankin. Service at the Bouton &! Our Telephone Never Sleeps—MAin 2-3700 
R APIRO, President. | yopolds Funeral) Home, ee tte | FLUSHING © JAMAICA © GARDEN CITY 
DORA SHAPIRO, Presid Wednesda morning, at 10:30 o'clock. Inter- - Cc: 


was born here, a daughter of Henry|Martha Totten Woodburn, Miss|kamper; a daughter, Mrs. Harry|sington Avenue, Lloyd’s of London|turing Company in Elizabeth for} Rose. ass geek SeAPm —. 
S. and Mary Hall Stall. Surviving; Woodburn was a member of the|Clark Smith; five grandchildren|representative in New Jersey for thirty-eight years, died today at| Soi; in New . yg oo of the one ae ~ -" RLS eee 


are her sister, Mrs. Warren Burnett,| auxiliary of the American Legion.|and two great-grandchildren. shipyard insurance contracts, died his home after an illness of several | late ev. Rene oe , a any of Anna, devoted father of Martha Horowitz 
and a nephew, Charles Burnett. | A sister, Miss Martha Woodburn : today in Christ Hospital. His age|}Months. He was born seventy-two! Cons. Funeral services at the Churen of | }&t Aipert. USA. Bugsne. yen i wedues RECORDS 
ae z her se ir ’ “ , ) ae, mene: 4 . » -¢ | Vears ago i mn. the Heavenly Rest, Fifth Ave. and 90th St = @ ? | 
SR and a brother, Joseph Woodburn CHARLES W. MARSAC Iwas 55. ; He leaves a widow, Mrs. years ago in Brooklyn Thursday, Nov 2, at 8 P. M. Interment ai ao iiidi Tutte. comtese Lebed te. 00 
ROBERT LINDNER survive Charles W. Marsac of 30-07 For-|Grace Whitham of Ridgewood. Bridect M spy by A 5 | Pend A. M.. etiend Masonic Funeral Serv in more permanent form 
o a . om —_ > , ridgepo ) ers | - ” ) Nathan & wdin 
Special to Tux New York Times ty-eighth Street, Astoria, Queens, MRS. GEORGE W. URQUHART yawnr RGER—Bertha, wife of the late Moser BB! , a Pu Won Satis Cheon 
aa al ’ , ¢ "wy . var _ , : id : : be 8 “ " . ’ SIN SIEMERS Special to Tus New Yoru Tuas. mother of Jerome and the late Sidney. Serv-| 415 West 79th St |! Ber records of births, marri deaths, 
WEST POINT, me te t. 31 DENNIS J. M’CARTHY an architect, died Monday at his) MOTHER VIRGD IA IER p ices Friday, Nov. 3. at 10:30AM. at “The | es Sling pein a at wad wg eviogen, —_ 
Robert Lindner, supervisor of bak- Special to THe New York Times home after an illness of a year. Special to Tue New York Times PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 31—Mrs PL LOUIS SMIRNOW., Secretar edition of The New York Times 
’ rev ~ . , ¢ ‘ . . , ‘ " a A} D— e } » 3 » 5 —Dr. N F Inivessal rogres ° 
ing at the cadet mess in the Unit- DANSVILLE, N. Y., Oct. 31 His age was 62. CHICAGO, Oct, 31—Mother Vir-|George W. Urquhart, widely, ‘30, after a short illness, husband of the late)" AWON—Dr. requests ‘othieert and members WEEKDAY—JSe:; SUNDAY—$1.25 


ed States Military Academy for|Dennis J. McCa:thy, retired mer-| He leaves a widow, Hope; two|ginia Siemers, a retired teacher at|known for her welfare work dur-| (oulse Elsworth. son, of ne ee tian | to attend services, Park West Chapel, 79th By mail every day--$125 2 year 
‘ . ma “ : 2 St. ar , 2:4 ) 
many years, died here Sunday in|chant and formerly for twenty-five|sons, Charles and Chester; a broth-|Barat College, Lake Forest, IIl.,j/ing the first World War and widow | beloved father of Dorothea | H Callender. | MICHAEL BERKAL., Secretary 
, ‘ | *‘Lawre ‘ ‘ “ . , ore ‘ ‘ —_ Louise aymon an the iate elen LICHBACH—Sa ’ t } st 1 
his home. He was born in Ger-|years a Lackawanna Railroad en-jer, Frank, and two sisters, Mrs.|died in the Society of the Sacredjof Dr. George W. Urquhart, died) G?eme Hammond. Services at the Church | MSICHBACH--Samuel. most beloved husband of as e New ork Times 
Heart Convent there today at the|at her home in Alden Park Manor) of Heavenly Rest, 90th St aud sth Ave., ¢ wd Lieut. Jay. dear brother of Irving and! 
° West.” 79th St.-/ 


many. He was a Mason. A sister|gineer, died here yesterday. His | Howard Rowe and Gertrude Mar- Wednesday, Now’ i. at 33 see ML : ow, a 
j . “a os i ednesday, 0 , a . 2 Aurray Services ‘Pari 
age of 78. last might, Her age was 79, ) private, ; i Coldmbus, Wednesday, 1:30 P. M. 


"A a niece survive. age Way 78. | Sad 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


WALSH RESENTFUL, |BRICKER PREDICTS 
a _| REPLIES 10 TRUMAN FARM BELT VICTORY 


Books .21/Obituaries 23 Senator From Massachusetts, | Thinks Washington and Oregon | 
Business 28-29 Radio . 39 Cl d Isolationi | Will Al Go R bli 

asus 28\Real Estate... 35 assed as an Isolationist, | i so Go Republican—. 
Says He Has No Apologies Dewey Phones Optimism 


Editorial ..22 Screen 19-20 
Events Today..21 Society a 
Fashions 26 Sports . .27-28 
Financial 29-35 Theatres .19-20 Special to Tae New Yorx Times COLUMBUS, Ohio, Oct. 31 (P)— 
Food . -26 Weather ......39 BOSTON, Oct. 31—United States|Governor Bricker declared today! 
Dispatches Other Than Those Listed;Senator David I. Walsh declared | that the Farm Belt States would| 
today that he _ resented being | go Republican in Tuesday's elec- 
THE WAR labeled an “isolationist” as he waS/tion, and added that he thought 
United States forced Chiang to prom- yesterday by Senator Harry S.|Washingtom and Oregon would, 
ise to intensify fighting Page 4| Truman, Democratic candidate for | too. 
Situation is ‘‘regrettably unfavor-|the Vice Presidency, in a State-| The Republican Vice Presiden- 
able,” Premier Koiso says. Page4)/ment made at Providence. On/ tial candidate, back from a 
Nin Way in battle off Liason” Page's Sunday, Senator Walsh had broken|month’s campaign swing into the 
Allies in Greece chase the Germans | # /028 Silence on his position in the| West and Northwest, said that he 
close to Yugoslav border. Page 7|campaign and announced his sup-/was “enthusiastic” over the out-| 
Meeting to insure order is planned|port of the Democratic national |Jook. 
by Greek factional leaders. Page7|and State tickets. | A few hours after he returned | 
geek mn opellerainy Remo me yh 5 ‘The immediate result of Senator|to the Executive Mansion, Gover- 
Fighting problems in Italy are dis-| Walsh's resentment, as expressedinor Dewey telephoned him, Mr. 
cussed by military analyst. Page 10|today, appeared to be a more de-|Bricker told a press conference, 
Negroes of Ninety-second Division)finitive split in the Democraticjand “assured me that the Repub- 
_are prow of gains in Italy. Page 10| ranks of the State. The Senator’s|licans will carry New York.” 
yr Connecticut listed. Page 12| ‘lends also resent Senator Tru-| The Farm Belt States, across 
Opinion on purges in France varies man’s remarks, while other fac-|which he traveled in his tour, are 
for lack of treason gauge. Page 13| tions support the views of the Vice/“solidly Republican,” the Gover-| 
French regime wins in militia crisis; Presidential nominee. With the risé|nor asserted. 
swing to the right is seen. Page 13/of sentiment for Governor Dewey| “And Missouri is in that belt,” 
Aattacke revealed at Breda. Page 14|i" Massachusetts. within the last /he added. “There's no doubt about 
New Mayor of Aachen sets up re-{two months, Senator Walsh’s um-|’ That is the home State of Sen- 
gime amid city’s rubble. Pagei4|brage may have an important|,tor Truman, Democratic Vice 
ON THE HOME FRONT j neazing on the outcome in the|Presidential nominee. He said he 
Czech envoy asks share for occu iea| State. henge Sa vy pes 6 geee 
om CRVOT SONS § P While he made clear that he/Chance of carrying Oklahoma, but 


lands in policing Europe. Page 6| P . 
Witness tells of $570,000 contract|Would not leave the party, Malas aia California to be 


at Gould’s court-martial. Page 9|radio talk scheduled for Thursday The G » id that 
War Fund goal is put at $1,000,000 a|night in support of the Democratic} 99 999 persons attended regularl 
day as the campaign lags. Page 25|ticket and his attendance at Presi-|‘ hed , eer irony - regu "‘on 
Distribution of A gascline books be-|dent Roosevelt’s appearance in to 7 wih Be sy es > ie T . 
gins at 110 schools in city. Page 25|Fenway Park on Saturday night oa wi eave ae or To- 
Year of residential rent control here | @T€ now in doubt. edo for's mar spect and will 
is reviewed by the OPA. Page 25 “No Apologies” Sav , {then go to the eastern seaboard. 
WLB will not vote on “‘collateral’’| earn stn, Bi ires Rchrving as ee a Satord og — in 
~ ad alley tye | Senz ’ 1. | Clevelan aturday night. 
pay issues before Nov. 7. Page25| Senator Truman at Providence, That address Governor Bricker 


400 civilian workers needed by the | told reporters there was “no differ-| ’ : ; 
Army for clothing repair. Page 26 | ence” between the “isolationist” | 2¢de4, wil! be his last of the drive. 


. f 7 |He said that he planned no speech 
POLITICS |record of Senator Walsh’and that! 1 tion eve and would spend elec- 


lof eight Republican Senators he; © . ; ; 
Roosevelt adds a broadcast speech (Truman) had asked Governor|tion night in his office where a 
tomorrow to his program. Pagel Dewey to repudiate, “except that | teletype 18 being installed to re- 
Dewey ridicules Roosevelt prosperity |Senator Walsh has two years to|°eivé returns. 
pledge; outlines own plan. Page1!seryve and we have a chance to re- Mr, Bricker said that he had 
Truman, Wallace and Wagner speak |form him.” been out of touch with the Ohio 
at Liberal party rally here. Pagel At his home in Clinton, Senator |°@™P@#!8n, in which two Mayors, 
Higher proportion taking literacy|walsh. who is chairman of the Frank J. Lausche of Cleveland, 
tests failed than in 1940. Pagel|commitee on Naval Affairs saiq| Democrat, and James Garfield 
CIO survey estimates Roosevelt lead | togay: , |Stewart of Cincinnati, Republican, 
e jare waging a bitter campaign to 


Today’s News Index 


WEDNESDAY NOV. 1, 1944 


DO YOUR CHRISTMAS SHOPPING NOW 
MAIL IN NOVEMBER 





in Summary on Page One 














in the city at 800,000 votes. Page17 
Validity of war ballots to be decided 
vy local election boards Page 17 
Republicans pin hopes on Nassau, 
Westchester and Suffolk. Page 17 
Curran says GOP programs, domes- 
tic and foreign, are best. Page 18 
Bricker confident Republicans will 
carry Farm Belt States. Page 24 
Walsh, resentful at ‘‘isolationist’’ 
label, replies to Truman. Page 24 
Mrs. Roosevelt says war and peace 
will decide women’s vote. Page 26 
Jesse Jones says Roosevelt is needed 
to fix peace of the world. Page 40 
President says that he suggested 
$1,000 club and is member. Page 40 
Miss Connors predicts victory over 
Mrs. Luce by 5,000 votes. Page 40 


NEW YORK 
Dr. Spencer gets Cleveland award for 
work in cancer education. Page 10 
Christians learn tenets of Judaism 
at unprecedented meeting. Page 11 
Frank Fay arrives in ‘‘Harvey"’ to- 
night; other news: stage. Page 19 


Dr. John A. Vietor, well-known sur-| 


geon, dies at the age of 60. Page 23 
McGoldrick reports the city’s fi- 
nances improved by war. Page 25 
City College students warned about 
an increase of muggings. Page 25 


“If there is any reforming to be} 


succeed Mr. Bricker in the State 


done, I am going to work to do this| 
myself, but within the ranks of| 
my own party, which I shal]! not 


house. 
But, he added, he will devote 
quit jhalf of the rest of the campaign 
. ito State issues and the rest to the 


Just what does Senator Truman | vstional ticket. 


mean by the word isolationist? | 


|Does he apply that term to eighty | 
INDUSTRIES TECHNICAL 


per cent of the American people 
| who were aaginst war before Pearl 
INSTITUTE 
PLASTICS STUDY FORUM CLASS 


|/Harbor? I was among that eighty 

|per cent and have no apologies to 
Starting November 14th 
The training covers materials, their 


make to anybody for my stand. 
“Does he mean a pacific is an 

properties and characteristics and 
standard methods of application. 


i. . . : 
jisolationist? I certainly have been 
Visit, Write, Dept. 30A 
or Phone MU. 5-3694 


ino pacifist and my record, proves 
122 E. 42d (Chanin Bidg.), N. Y. 17 
Licensed by the State of New York 


|that I, long before Pearl Harbor, 
Member: Society of the Plastics Industry 


| 


‘always spoke for and worked for} 
|measures to give our nation the} 
llargest navy in the world and a| 
mechanized army. 
“Or does he apply that word to} 
those who are against scrapping} 
our sovereignty and our constitu-| 
tional rights in order to join an in-| 
ternational union for peace and to} 
use our Army to enforce such a 
political arrangement? 
| “Now my relations with Senator | 
|'Truman are friendly and I assume 
lhe made his remark without re- 
ljalizing that the word ‘isolationist’ 


POLITICAL ADVERTISEMENT 


* 
AA NB. 
. \ J 


What a gay collection of coats in the Mimi 


Shop! Chesterfields with soft rayon velveteen collars, 
single or double 


W ondertull+ 


hoy-coats with huge flap pockets, 

breasted box coats, some with large pearl buttons. 

warm in all wools, Harris tweeds, camel's hair and wool. 

Lovely in Lorelei green, Victorian heauty, Casanova brown and black. 


Sizes PDto 17. Mimi; Shop—tThird Floor, Fashion Store 


Park Ave. tenants complain against/is regarded today by many as op- 


parrot owned by neighbor. Page 25 
Omar Kiam skows ‘‘complete’’ wo- 
man in fashion collection. Page 26 


METROPOLITAN AREA 
Henrietta Crosman, a noted actress, 
&3, dies in Pelham Manor. Page 23 
Harry M. Edwards, a civic leader 
in Brooklyn, is dead at 77. Page 23 
GENERAL 
Delegates of fifty countries gather 
in Chicago for air parley 
New post-war code is proposed by 
taxpayers’ association. Page 40 
SOCIETY 
Miss Elaine Burkhardt is betrothed 
to Frank S. Pohanka Jr. Page 19 


Miss Anne du Pont Peyton completes | 


plas for her marriage. Page 19 
FINANCIAL AND BUSINESS 
Studebaker profit for the first nine 
months put at $2,947,284. Page 29 
Additional curbs on civilian produc- 
tion are eased by the WPB. Page 30 
War contracts valued at $21,000,000,- 
000 have been cancelled. Page 30 
Single over-all retail pricing regula- 
tion shelved by the OPA, Page 30 
Stock market makes spotty advance, 

paced by aircraft issues. Page 30 
Competition for two utility issues is 
marked by close bidding. Page 30 
Metropolitan Edison bonds and stock 
is offered publicly today. Page 30 
Customers’ brokers seen involved in 
stock “‘kickback racket.’’ Page 30 
United States Steel’s sales at new 
high, but net income falls. Page 30 
Head of Macy’s says sales and earn- 
ings are “running well.’’ Page 30 
Latest developments on bond and 
shar@ markets in London. Page 31 
Federal Reserve system holds 70% 
of all U. S. bills on Oct. 25. Page 33 
Turnover on the Stock Exchange is 
best for October since 1939. Page 33 
$29,828,000 of short-term notes sold 
by 17 housing authorities. Page 35 
Consolidated Edison shows a slight 
decline in its net income. Page 35 

Page Page 
Advertising 29\Foreign Exch..31 
Bus. Records. 28'Grains ........34 
Bond Sales.....32)/Money ........33 
Commodities.. .34 Out-of-Town . .33 
Cotton .34 Over Counter. .35 
Curb ..82 Stock Sales... 


29 


Dividends .....32 
SPORTS 


Page 15|° 


| probrious. 
“Two Dangerous Groups” 


“There are two dangerous groups 
in our country today and they 
must be stopped if we are to pre- 
serve America. 

“They are in both the Republi- 
can and Democratic parties. One 
is made up of those extremists who 
would have us scrap the Constitu- 
tion by repealing the right of Con- 


igress to declare war and also the 
provision that treaties must be} 
jratified by a two-thirds vote of the} 
| Senate. 
| “The other group consists of| 
those extremists who would have 
our country stand aloof, blindfold- 
ed and apart from all international 
| cooperation. 

| “I stand with those who believe 
|in the fullest possible international | 
|cooperation for peace consistent 
iwith our Constitution. 

“The most important problem in| 
the country today, next to winning 
the war, is the establishment of a| 
just and honest peace, just to all 
nations, large and small. 








LEGAL ADVERTISEMENTS 





SUPREME COURT, NEW YORK COUNTY. 
President and Directors of the Manhattan 
Company (successor to Bank of Manhattan 
Trust Company by merger). as Trustee under 
a deed of trust made and executed by Kath- 
arine Head Breck, dated July 2nd, 1931. Plain- 
tiff, against John George Breck. Katharine 
Breck Onofril, Flavia Caterina Onofrii. Gio- 
vanni Georgio Onofril. Cesare Onofrii, St. 
John's Episcopal Church, Margaret Head Per- 
kins, Cara D. Durkee, Helen Perkins Knight, 
Margaret Perkins Bliss. Elizabeth Perkins 
Borish (formerly Elizabeth Perkins). John 
Shortall Perkins, and President and Directors 
of the Manhattan Company as Executor of the 
last Will and Testament of Katharine Head 
Breck, deceased, James E. Markham as Alien 
Property Custodian Defendants Plaintiff 
Designates New York County as the Place of 
Trial Summons 

TO THE ABOVE NAMED DEFENDANTS: 
YOU ARE HEREBY. SUMMONED to answer 
the complaint In this action and to serve a 
copy of your answer. or. {if the complaint is 
not served with this summons, to serve «@ 


}notice of appearance on the plaintiff's at- 


“In my opinion, a just PEACE | torneys within twenty days after the service 


treaty is the basis for all future) 


peace and understanding. Such a} 


peace must be free of maladjust-| 
ments which are the causes of war. | 


of this summons, exclusive of the day of service. 
In case of your failure to appear. or answer, 
judgment will be taken against you by default, 
for the relief demanded in the complaint. 
Dated, June 21, 1944 
SPENCER, ORDWAY & WIERUM, 
Attorneys for Plaintiff 


It must mean the right of all|ortice ana P.O. address, 72 Wall Street, New 


peoples of all nations to be free. 
It must mean the giving to the 
small as well as to the large na-| 
tions access to the raw materials 
of the world so that small nations 
may exist 

“I believe our country should 
take the leadership in uniting all 
nations to prevent war in the fu- 
ture and promote peace.” 

The Senator referred to Prime 
Minister Churchill and Premier 
Stalin as the “two most outstand-| 
ing isolationists in the world to-| 
day.” 

They were “always doing every- 
thing possible to protect, and in 
some cases to expand, their im- 
perialistic powers. My own politi- 
cal philosophy compels me to re- 
sent being called an isolationist if 
the term means being put into a 
type with them.” 


York 5, N. Y¥, 

To the above named defendants in this ac- 
tion, Katharine Breck Onofrii. Flavia Caterina 
Onofrii Giovanni Georgio Onofrii Cesare 
Onofrii Margaret Head Perkins. Cara D 
Durkee, Helen Perkins Knight, Margaret Per- 
kins Bliss. John Shortall Perkins: 

The foregoing summons ts served upon you 
by publication pursuant to an order of the 
Hon. Thomas A. Aurelio. a Justice of the Su 
preme Court of the State of New York, dated 
the 25th day of August. 1944, and filed with 
the complaint in the office of the Clerk of the 
County of New York, in the Borough of Man- 
hattan. City. County and State of New York 
Dated, August 28th, 1944. 

SPENCER, ORDWAY & WIERUM. 
Attorneys for Plaintiff 
Office and P. O. Address, 72 Wall Street, New 
York 5, New York. 


NOTICE 

To Rose Hannigan Hines, or her heirs. 
| You are hereby notified that the estate of 
James J. Hannigan, late of Pottsville, Penn- 
sylvania, will be distributed to cousins of the 
decedant unless you produce evidence on or 
before November 13, 1944, showing that Rose 
Hannigan Hines, sister of the decedant, is 
alive or is dead leaving issue now living. 

By order of the Orphans’ Court of Schuylkil) 
County, Pennsylvania 
| SAFE DEPOSIT BANK OF POTTSVILLE, 
| Pottsville, Pennsylvania, 

Administrator. 

| Elwyn Jones, Attorney-at-Law, 
| 408 Thompson Building. Pottsville. Pa. 





Baruna, 20 to 1, defeats Caribou by} 


a length at Jamaica Page 27 


34.00 


‘other untrimmed coats 19.75 to 48.50 


fur-trimmed coats *48.50 to 115.00 


*Some fur-trimmed coats subject to 20°%, Federal Excise Tax 


tReg. U. S. Pat. Off. 


FASHION SHOW —tonight at 6:00 


Modelling of coats, suits and dresses for misses, women. and juniors. 


BUDGET STORE 


Phillies will get the first choice at 
baseball draft today. Page 27 | 
Kubale, Bridges named co-coaches| 
of Brooklyn Tiger eleven. Page 28) 
Hall and Watts of Columbia ordered | 
to Wesleyan by Navy. Page 28) 
Fusilli, former Dartmouth line star, | 
joins squad at Yale Page 28) 


ADVERTISEMENTS 
Page 

Apartments ...36 Moving 

Automobiles 39 Public Notices. 2 
Business Opps. 2 Real Estate. 36} 
Buyers’ Wants.29 Resorts 14 
Education 11 Rooms, Board 36 
For Sale 38 Situations 38 | 
Help Wanted. .36 Stores, Offices.36| 
Lost & Found..36 Wanted to Pur.39 


MAIN STORE—PHILADELPHIA 


Chestnut a 


| MAIN STORE—NEW YORK LIBERTY STREET SHOP LONDON SHOP 


Street Fashions for Misses and Juniors A Distinctive Shop for Men 


Broadway at 9th | 
, Store Hours: 9:30 to 5:30 150 Broadway 59 Liberty Street ' 

/ Wednesday 9:30 to 9:00 Store Hours: 11:00 to 6:00 Store Hours: 9:00 to 5:30 MEN’S STORE—PHILADELPHIA 
ny Bp Ry RA By --F STuyvesant 9-4700 REctor 2-1000 REctor 2-1000 South Penn Square 


Published monthly and «&innually. 





Ww 


1944, 


EDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 








OPAREVIEWS YEAR 
OF RENT CONTROL 


Woolley Reports ‘Outstanding 
Success in Holding the Line’ 
for 2,250,000 Tenants 


IMPARTIALITY IS STRESSED 


Thousands of Landlords Won 
Rises, Though 10% Blanket 
Increase Was Denied 


On the first anniversary of resi- 
dential rent control here, Daniel P. 
Woolley, regional head of the Of- 
fice of Price Administration, hailed 
yesterday the operation of the plan 
in this area as “an outstanding 
success in holding the line” on 
prices charged for 2,000,000 apart- 


ments and rented homes and 250,- | 


000 rooms in hotels and rooming 


houses. | 

Despite the complex problems 
presented in New York by enforce- 
ment of rent ceilings for all types 
of properties from expensive apart- 
ments to cold-water flats and rural | 
dwellings, control of rents has been; 
“highly effective in holding down 
the cost of living and checking one} 
of the chief sources of inflation,” | 
Mr. Woolley reported. 

Reviewing the results of the 
first year’s operation of rent ceil- 
ings for New York City and Nas- 
sau and Suffolk Counties, Mr.| 
Woolley praised the efforts of John | 
Scofield, OPA rent executive, and} 
Walter M. Hort, New York area} 
rent director, and their staffs in 
trying to be impartial in handling 
disputes between landlords and 
tenants 

He reported that during the year 
of control here, 57,537 petitions for 
rent adjustments had been filed by| 
landlords or their agents. Of 
these, 30,761 were denied, while! 
upward adjustments of rent were 
granted in 21,628 cases. 

119,217 Tenants Complained 

From tenants the OPA received 
119,217 protests, of which 32,206 
were “adjusted” and 38,300 denied 
or withdrawn after conferences. 
Rents have been reduced in 9,738 
cases and rent refunds amounting 
to $113,925 ordered for 4,716 com- 
In 10,265 cases services! 
ordered restored 


plainants., 
for tenants were 
to conditions of March 1, 1943, 
which was the rent ceiling date 
fixed for this region 

One of the “major actions of 
the OPA during the year was de- 
nial of a petition by the Metropoli- 
tan Fair Rent Committee, an or- 
ganization of New York realty 
owners and agents, for a 10 per 
cent blanket increase in residential 
rents, Mr. Woolley said. This ac- 
tion, he estimated, saved tenants | 
$100,000,000 annually on their rent 
bills 

While most landlords have co- 
operated in the rent control pro- 
gram, it was necessary in a num-| 
ber of cases to take “vigorous ac-| 
tion against violators,” he said. A| 
broad enforcement program is} 
being carried out to halt increased 
charges in rooming houses, with 
about 500 operators of such build- 
ings, chiefly in Manhattan and 
Brooklyn, already brought into 
court Most of these have paid 
fines, and in a few cases served 
short terms in jail. 

The OPA also has blocked ef-| 
forts of some landlords, apartment | 
house superintendents and _ hotel| 
clerks to require bonuses or gratu- 
ities from tenants to assure accom- 
modations; it has taken action to 
enforce compliance with its paint- 
ing and redecorating standards, | 
and has countered the efforts of | 
some tenants or owners to require | 
purchases of furniture at “exorbi- 
tant prices” as a condition to leas- | 
ing or sub-leasing an apartment 


VOIDS ARTIST’S MARRIAGE | 


Foley Revokes Administration 
Letters on Flannagan Estate 


f 


i 


| 


The marriage of John B. Flan- 
nagan, American sculptor, to Mrs. 
Margherita L. Flannagan of 3291 
West Twenty-first Street, alleged 
to have taken place in New Jersey 
in 1936, was declared “bigamous 
and void” by Surrogate James A.| 
Foley yesterday in a decision re-| 
voking letters of administration on | 
the sculptor’s estate. Mr. Flanna-| 
gan committed suicide by gas in| 
his studio on Jan. 7, 1942. | 

In his ruling Surrogate Foley} 
granted the petition of Mrs. Grace | 
Flannagan of 157 West Twenty-| 
second Street, whom the sculptor 
married on April 7, 1929, and who 
is the mother of his 13-year-old 
daughter, Moria Flannagan. The 
court held that this marriage was 
never dissolved by a valid divorce} 
or annulment. 

In her application for the letters 
last January, Mrs. Margherita 
Flannagan informed the court that 
the decedent had obtained a Mex-| 
ican divorce when both he and his} 
wife were residents of New York, 
and represented herself as_ his! 
widow 


CITY DEATHS UP IN WEEK 


of 1,561 Is Increase of 
Thirteen in Period 





Total 
increase of thirteen deaths} 
all causes in the city last 

compared with the previous} 
week. was reported yesterday by 
Dr. Ernest L. Stebbins, Health 
Commissioner. 

“In the week ended Oct. 27) 
deaths totaled 1,561," the report 
said. “The generai death rate for| 
the week was 10.7 per thousand| 
of population. The general death} 
rate for the first forty-three-week | 
period of 1944 was 10.3, compared} 
to 10.6 in the corresponding period | 
of 1943 

“Increased mortality 
week was recorded for heart and 
other circulatory diseases, which 
were up forty-five, and for dia- 
betes, up twelve, while cancer) 
deaths decreased by thirty-three 
and pneumonia deaths by four- 
teen. Ninety infant deaths were| 
reported.” 


An 
from 
week, 





for this! 


RESCUE FROM 


“NAVY PERSONNEL AFTER 


| ji 
r 


ee 


. 


| 





Two women marines and three of the eleven crew members of a Liberator bomber are shown here in| 
San Diego, Calif., where they were brought by a Coast Guard plane which went to their aid. They lived: 
for four days on an island near the eastern coast of Lower California after their plane crashed and sank at 
sea and were finally rescued by Mexican fishermen. Left to right: Pf-. Edna H. Shaughnessy, Manchester, 
N. H.; Pfc. Helen L. Breckel, Cincinnati, Ohio; Comdr. Donald B. MacDiarmid, pilot of the Coast Guard 
plane; Ordnanceman Lloyd T. Cantrell, Columbus, Ga.; Radioman Fred Reuss (standing), Godfrey, Ill., and 


Seaman C. F. Mabry, Dallas, Tex. Associated Press Wirephoto (U.S. Coast Guard) 





DEFERS VOTES Women Go to School A gain Here, 





WLB 





ON PAY PAST NOV.7, But Only to Get New A ‘Gas’ Books 


| Women pushing baby carriages Robert Stantial, principal of the! 
Davis Tells Status of Talks on/2nd leading older children by the! school, reported that 700 ration | 


J hand were among the applicants books had been issued up to 5) 
‘Collateral’ Issues—CIO Sets who appeared yesterday at 110/7 a yhereg- he expected 3,000 to} 
Hope on Findings by Nov. 20 pron nip on pom ee ae oft i een. Six- 

Z y * renewals of basic ° y. 
ie ow - |gasoline rations. In many pet hcs Bernard Colton, principal of! 
ithe women were applying on be-| Public School 6, Madison Avenue! 
half of their husbands, who were 4"4 Eighty-fifth Street, reported} 
at work. Long before starting nay oorreen of ration books 
ae, lines formed outside the/n*4 | pow oa a “< 3:30 
uildings. é . anc 1a ,125 had been is- 
Distribution is scheduled to con-|Sued. By 7 AP ws yrs — appli- 
inue for three days, Yesterday |© its were within e building. 
was earmarked for motorists whose} .4. "umber of persons who ap- 
_ oe began with letters EN ee la Ml te ayy registered | 
“A” through “G.” Those in the miGG sveWw =O ity were re-| 
“H” to “O” group will receive thetr| ee the OPA office at 1775) 
books today and the “P” to “Z” 6 4 
group will be recognized tomorrow | , Jala oe High School, ol 
at the schools, which are open from |‘Y-S¢venth Street and Second Ave-| 
3:30 to 7 P. M. 


| 
At Public School 14, Twenty-| 


nue, estimated that it had issued} 
2,000 ration books. Applicants! 
seventh Street between Second and| 
Third Avenues, the line at 3:15) 


trickled in slowly at the start, and| 

only 150 books were issued in the | 

, first two hours 
P. M. extended beyond Third Ave- Tar . 
nue. At Public School 87, Seventy-| <;)*' res. 8. 165, 234 Vv est 109th| 
seventh Street and Amsterdam| reet, the wife of a man who had 
Avenue, more than 200 paeenalee ee ee — gerne 
were wa : ner. She Was sent) 
is now the hope of CIO officials etn eimai ptm yale lock. | away with a warning. 
that the board’s findings in the/pusiness was relatively slack |, About 800 persons — 
case will be handed down before| Many complaints were vated sins books at P. S. 132, Wadsworth| 
the CIO convention Nov. 20. 'persons unaware that books would|P M3 Se ee 5 
The board gave most of its time|not pe distributed at all schools |P. M. There was no line and some) 
today to discussion of one of the/The telephone board at the Srenn |e teachers handled the work | 
chief demands of the United Steel|office of Price Administrettien| ee delays. 


Workers, a guaranteed annual] he; , , Five thousand and one books| 
wage. AFL members did not at- headquarters, 383 East 149th/were distributed at five schools on} 


: Street, was swamped with calls|Manhattan’s W i VY were | 
tend ee eaten, ee 9 = ors from persons asking what they/P. s 165. a a. — ae 
ance with their stand for a de-|\shoula d , ionlhanke: P @ eh et ety 
cision first on the over-all question se ee, ee eee vomee nennes Es ms = ee ge ane * 

evant : 8. Ninety-third § at, O77 
re ner age = national wage sta-| By jate afternoon, 400 persons,|books: P. S. il hahin Avenuhl 
7 ion policy. mostly women, had formed a line}and Twenty-first Street, 1,212) 
Mr. Davis said that the board) at public se : > : : pe ace 
id nok deen 2h teel to ublic School] 80, Mosholu Park-| books, and Chelsea High School, | 
ciscuss «he stee! union S'way and Van Cortlandt Park East.|131 Sixth Avenue, 772 b k 

demand for a wage increase of 17) e Baki CONS. 


Special to Tue New York Times 

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 The 
National War Labor Board will not 
take a vote on “collateral” issues 
in the steel wage case before Nov. 
it was made today by 
Chairman William H. Davis 

Mr. Davis is understood to have 
stated the board today 
when it began to consider the 
various “fringe” issues in the case 
At a press conference he said that 
he did not know when the issues 
would be put to a vote. 

His statement to the board dis- 
pelled any possibility that the 
pressure by the CIO would bring 
board action on at least some. of 
the issues before election day. It 


7, clear 


this to 


obtained | 





| 
| 
| 


Association, 


| 


Marks 50th Anniversary of 
the Motion-Picture Industry 





| 


Supreme Court Justice Ferdi- 
jnand Pecora approved yesterday a 
jsettlement of the $95,000 negli-| 
igence suit brought against Count-| 
ess Gisele de Chambrun, 36 years’ 
old, wife of Count Jean de Cham- 
jbrun, French artist and descend-| 
jant of Lafayette, as a result of in- 
juries suffered last Christmas Eve} 
|by Robert Pell, 10 years old, son 





cents an hour, nor the proposal} ~~. c€ Te ; , 
that the union and the industry be . 
AP TO SUPPLY NEWS | 21st Birthday Card Urged 
re-establish service men in jobs . > . 
Both these questions, Mr. Davis | THROUGHOUT WORLD To Certify Right to Drink 
the scope of the discussions, since; The post-war world service of 
they went beyond the wage stabi-| The Associated Press provides for] ATLANTIC CITY, Oct. 31-— 
The New Jersey Licensed Bever- 
inews collecting and distributing! 
NEW STAMP ON SALE HERE | tacitities to all parts of the globe,| 7.400 tavern owners throughout 
| | the State, voted at its conven- | 
It 
|} said yesterday. 
In announcing the plans of serv-| Legislature for a law “requiring 
all persons to register with their 
A new 3-cent purple stamp de-| jac¢ meeting of the organization's 
ing a movie show near the field of| also disclosed that a large part apete Snap eieat: etrthday eae 
battle was placed on sale yester- | of the program already was under to secure a registration card 
lobby of the General Postoffice at|*°TYices, expanded or newly or-| tify their right to buy alcoholic 
. Scandinavian and North Sea coun- 
Street. The issue commemorates | tries, France, Italy, the Iberian A second resolution asked a 
the fiftieth anniversary of the first i reduction in the penalty for 
rica, China, India and the Pacific.! “first offenses’ in sales to 
The announcement by Postmas- 
been more vital need for the type! “ ‘ni 
new stamps would be forwarded to| of independent and objective wid. 9 . _ the Opinion of this as- 
President Roosevelt by Postmaster : sociation,” the delegates said, 
Press has undertaken to supply a 
plauded by the several thousand py] 1a reputable, law-abiding alco- 
over,” Mr. Cooper said. “Trust- : 
Mr. Walker and other speakers| worthy and iapartial news, wheth-| "4rshly and unduly penalized for 
paid tribute to the motion picture) an unwitting violation in making 
do as much as anything else to : 
morale of the troops on distant! y 8s The association will also seek 
neighbors of people in a world that; *. ; 
Postmaster Goldman, who pre- ae arene eke aoaih tion of minors for the purchase 
sided, recalled that fifty years ago, of alcoholic beverages. 
activities of The Associa = — 
Twenty-seventh Street, one of the : = Mare 
tee Seemann A ahi anaeiet-one | furthering the cause of world en- CHAMBRUN SUIT SETTLED 
A : nas . GL § - li ht me h j - 
tion pictures of the Corbett-Court- | a cee ere 
in which the news agencie: of all Are to Receive $7,578 
ZONING CHANGE UP TODAY business ot satisfactorily serving} 
their subscribers.” 
|there had been gradual establish- 
Proposed Amendment |ment of AP global services and 
The City ‘ |}now would be under the direction 
at its regular meeting today at/ of Lloyd Stratton, secretary of The 
on its proposed amendment to the| Mr. Stratton has traveled 80,000 
zoning regulation to provide new! iles visiting newspaper and news|o? Mr. and Mrs. F. Livingston 
The commission, overruling de-| Patt of the world. Street. 
mands by real estate owners and ay 3 ROS yw itically inj 
’ To Hear Camp Fraud Charges The boy was critically injured 
grant further time for considera-| . Eighty-first Street. The Countess 
tion of its amendments or to grant |(®) — Representative Andrew J./jater was arraigned in Homicide| 
proposal from Irving V. A. Huie, | Chairman of the House Military|driver of the car at the time of! 
commissioner. Affairs Committee, said today that|the accident. 
its capital budget for 1945, totaling |charges of fraud in the building|mother, sought $75,000 for the 
$198,317,593. Of this total $151,-|and maintenance of Camp Shanks/boy’s injuries and $20,000 for her 
tions, while $24,325,673 consists of |gress reconvenes. He added that 
funds earmarked in the 1944 capi-|the case had been referred to the 


compelled to set up a fund to help) 
stated, were deemed to be outside} 
Special to Tue New Youw Times 
lization policy. 'the extension of its international! 
age representing 
| Kent Cooper, executive director, 
tion here today to petition the 
}ice development adopted at the) 
picting an audience of GI’s watch-|board of directors, Mr. Cooper municipal clerk upon reaching 
day at special ceremonies in the|/“4Y. AP news and news photo} bearing their signature” to cer- 
yanized, have bee , 
Eighth Avenue and Thirty-third|& a eee ee ee TT overages. 
Peninsula, the Mediterranean, Af- 
operation of motion pictures here. 
“At no time in history has there! minors. 
ter Goldman that a sheet of the 
intelligence that The Associated} « 
General Frank C. Walker was ap- & i | “that under the present State 
newspapers and radio the world : : 
persons at the ceremony. me holic beverage licensees may be 
er in copy or news pictures, will - 
industry for its contribution to the| es . sales to minors.” 
make understanding and contented cont 
fronts. a State law permitting prosecu- 
“The ‘world-wide news gatheri 
in a small store on Broadway near 3 m1 oe 
. are to be realisticall lied t 
first kinetoscopes invented by the Ay me ag 
ney prizefight. jination of truthful news—a cause| Parents of Boy Injured by Car’ 
countries can share along with the| 
Planning Board to Act on the, Mr. Cooper said that since 1930 
Planning Commission that completion of the program 
2:30 P. M. in City Hall will act| Associated Press. In the last year 
restrictions on new construction. |@gency executives in nearly every| pel] Jr, of 156 East Seventy-ninth 
° | 
realty interests, has refused to j/while crossin Park ve : 
PRESTONSBURG, Ky., Oct. 31 S may vee then 
public hearings on an alternative |May, Democrat, of Kentucky, and|/ Court and charged with being the 
The commission will act also on|it would open public hearings into| ‘The suit, brought by the boy's 
890,586 represents new appropria-|at Orangebourg, N. Y., after Con-|services. An affidavit by Mrs.| 
The capital program|War Frauds Division of the De- 





| the $17,200,000 goal. 


\for the rest of the campaign if we 


}contracts, I'm all for them.” 


lmony in Carnegie Hall preceding 
ia concert of the New York Phil- 


The New Pork Times 
DESERTED ISLAND W AR FUND G0 AL PUT | M 


AT 1000000 A DAY 


Less Than Half of Quota Here 
Raised, With 11 Days to Go, 
Campaign Head Says 


DONATIONS AT $7,392,725 


Women’s Division Only Group 
Topping Total—Home Front 
Group Lags at 32% 


The New York War Fund, with 
only eleven days to go before the 
scheduled end of its 1944 cam- 
paign, announced yesterday that it 
had raised $7,392,725, less than 
half the quota. Addressing 500 
campaign leaders and representa- 
tives of cooperating agencies at 
the second report luncheon in the 
Hotel Roosevelt, Richard W. Law- 
rence, the campaign chairman, 
urged intensified work to achieve 


j 


“We must raise $1,000,000 a day 


are to reach our quota,” he de- 
clared. “We are definitely behind 
the eight ball, but I believe that if 
we really get behind this we will 
have a victory to report on Nov. 
11. We've got to keep at it until 
we do.” 

The woman's division; the only 
group to surpass its quota, re- 
ported at a morning session in the 
Ritz-Carlton Hotel that it had 
raised $1,060,066, or 106 per cent 
its assignment. Mrs. Vincent 
Astor, chairman of the division, 
declared that the women had} 
“reached our quota, but not our; 
goal,” and that they would con- 
tinue their efforts until the end of 
the drive. l 

In addition, Miss Marie Cecilia; 
Lynn, a member of the dtvieion’s! 
Latin-American team, presented a 
check for $122,886, raised for the) 
fund in Costa Rica. 

“Something Big” Urged | 

Newbold Morris, President of the} 
City Council and director of the| 
home front division of the War! 
Fund, called on campaign workers| 
to “do something big to wake up| 
the people of New York who think} 
the job is done.” Only 32 per cent} 
of the division’s quota had been 
reached, he revealed. 

Borough leaders reported the) 
following totals: Manhattan, $111,-| 
350, or 28 per cent of quota; Brook- | 
lyn, $646,800, also 28 per cent; | 
Queens, $314,160, likewise 28 per| 
cent; Bronx, $341,000, 31 per cent, | 
and Richmond, $225,000, 63 per 


cent. | 
Dr. James L. McConaughy, presi-| 


| 





of 


| 


|dent of United China Relief, who} 
from a six-week! But OPA Changes Rules Only|national commander of the Dis- 


returned recently 
stay in China, called Generalis- 
simo Chiang Kai-shek the “one 
person who can lead China.” Refer- 
ring to the differences between 
him and Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell 
that led to the general’s recall,| 
Dr. McConaughy said this was} 
“not the first time that leaders) 
under the strain of war had come 
to the parting of the ways.” 

Dr. McConaughy also discussed | 
the charges made in the China- 
Burma-India theatre that USO- 
Camp Show entertainers had ‘‘fall- 
en down on the job” there. 

“My hat’s off to anyone who 
goes to China to entertain the 
boys,” he commented. “Even 
though, for physical reasons, a 
couple of them have broken down 
and been unable to fulfill their 
| 

He described the strenuous life 
that traveling entertainers led in 
that area and mentioned Joe E, 
Brown, whose “efforts were really 
appreciated everywhere he went.” 

The twenty-sixth anniversary of 
the founding of Czechoslovakia 
was observed last night at a cere- 


| 
| 


harmonic Orchestra. The program 
was sponsored by American 
Friends of Czechoslovakia for the 
benefit of the war fund. Ronald 
Colman, screen star, read messages 
from President Roosevelt and 





slovakia, and Vladimir Hurben, 


Perk Avenia Parrot’s 


| Commenting that it was a case, “Chinese-like torture” 


for the wisdom of a Solomon, 
Magistrate Charles E. Ramsgate} 
yesterday in the Municipal Term 
Court deferred a decision until 
Nov. 14 on complaints of tenants 
in the large apartment house at 
277 Park Avenue against Jocko, 
the 23-year-old parrot of Mrs. Mil- 
dred H. Burr on the fifth floor, 
whose shrieks and whistlings at 
sunrise each day, they charged, de- 
prive them of sleep. 

Thomas D. O'Connell, a health 
inspector, last Friday served a 
summons on Mrs. Burr, widow of 
George H. Burr, broker and former 
head of the American Red Cross, 
and mother of Courtney Burr, 


|theatrical producer, charging vio- 


lation of the Sanitary Code. At his 
request, Mr. O’Connell said, Mrs. 
Burr had shifted Jocko from a win- 
dow on the Park Avenue side of 
her suite to another on the Forty- 
seventh Street side, but the neigh- 


‘bors still complained. He revealed/it would 
|that Maj. Henry S. Hooker, a for-| rows,” 


mer law partner of President 
Roosevelt and the leading elector 
on the Roosevelt-Truman Demo- 
cratic ticket in this State, was one 
of the tenants who complained. 
Arnold Furst, the lawyer for the} 
complaining tenants, insisted the 
noise made by Jocko is detrimental 





Pell’s attorney disclosed that she/|to the health of the neighbors. He|would take 
will accept a settlement of $7,578,| went on that, since last July, Mrs.} Solomon to solve this case. I sug-| Brigham Darger has been accused |seventeen of the company's twen- 


payment to be made by the “insur-|Burr had made it a practice to/ gest that, while I’m taking this up|of urging Cathryn Lucy Cosgrove |ty-five plants. 


NEW YORK WARFUND 


WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944, 


B 


uggings Arouse City College; 
Students Warned to Avoid Park 


oys Robbed on Way to Subway—No Racial 


| 


Problem Involved, Says Dean—Own Police 


Force for Institu 


An outbreak of muggings and 
hold-ups by Negro youths in the 
vicinity of City College, Convent 
Avenue and 138th Street, has led 
Dr. Jéhn L. Bergstresser, chair- 
man of the Department of Student 
Life, to warn students against 
walking through St. Nicholas 
Park, adjacent to the school, where 
five or six attacks on students 
have been made during the last 
two weeks. 

Dr. Bergstresser declared yes- 
terday that he felt it “advisable 
for students not to use the route 
through the park, especially if 
alone,” and that he was con- 
templating sending a form letter 
around to the classrooms urging 
students to walk to the 145th 
Street station of the Independent 
Subway. 

The shortest route to the sub- 
way from the college is through a 
pathway in St. Nicholas Park lead- 
ing to the 137th Street station, and 
it was on this path that the mug- 
gings took place. The attackers, 
all Negro boys in their teens, 
usually approach the student, the 
dean said, with the question: 
“Have you got a nickel?” 





% v | 
4rTiron” 


* tk * 


FOR OUR OWN: FOR OUR ALLIES 


To help make existence less 
unendurable for those captured 
by Axis forces and to relieve the 
monotony of prison camp routine, 
War Prisoners Aid sends mate- 
rials for recreation, education 
and occupation. Tons of such 
supplies are shipped to the var- 
ious camps; distribution is su- 
pervised by representatives from 
neutral countries who also report 
on the condition of American and 
Allied prisoners of war. 

A gift to the New York War 
Fund, of which War Prisoners 
Aid (of the Young Men's Chris- 
tian Association and War Relief 
Services, National Catholic Wel- 
fare Conference) is a member 
agency, helps to send sunshine 
into the lives of these heartsick 
men and at the same time aids 
the essential services of thirty 
other war-related agencies serv- 
ing our own and our allies. 

Give as generously as you can 
to the New York War Fund, 57 
William Street, New York 5, 
N. Y. “They'll Never Forget 
That You Remembered!” 


AUTO BUYING MADE EASIER 


for Those on Eligible List 


Special to Tue New Yorx Times 

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—The 
Office of Price Administration 
moved today to make it easier for 
civilians to buy passenger cars if 
they are eligible for them. 

In an amendment to the auto- 
mobile ration order the agency will 
require all automobile dealers to 
post lists of their current inven- 
tory of 1942 cars held for sale. The 
cars must be listed by make, body 
type, serial number and engine 
number and whether new or used. 
If the daler has no 1942 cars for 
sale, a notice to this effect must 
also be posted. 

Under the new ruling, officials 
said, dealers who refused to sell 


‘a car to a prospective buyer who| Harvey H. Hevenor to Serve 


has “the cash and the necessary 
papers” may be barred from deal- 
ing in any cars now rationed or 
that may be rationed in the future. 


Hurt as Lift Drops 4 Floors 

A service elevator in the seven- 
teen-story apartment building at 
420 Park Avenue fell from the 
fourth floor into the basement yes- 
terday when its supporting cable 
snapped. Ten persons working in 
th. building were in the car, but 
police said only one was hurt. 
Michael Faughnan, 43 years old, 


to have suffered a contusion of the 


|\Czechoslovak Ambassador, spoke.|right ankle. 


Daily Hymn to Sen 


_ Brings Chorus of Complaints From Tenants 


with its 
continuous screaming. 

Mr. Furst contended a parrot 
should not be kept in an apart- 
ment house in which the rentals 
are so high and that Jocko should 
be “taken to the wilds and re- 
leased.” 

George P. Halperin, attorney for 
Mrs. Burr, told the court his client 
could not appear in the proceeding 
because she is an invalid. Jocko, 
he went on, is an African parrot, 
had been Mrs. Burr’s pet for eigh- 
teen years, and she would be un- 


| happy without the bird. He sug- 


gested the magistrate adjourn the 
proceeding to her suite in the 
apartment house, to which Magis- 
trate Ramsgate announced: “I'll 
have to take that up with Chief 
Magistrate Curran.” 

“We don’t ask that any punish- 
ment be imposed on Mrs. Burr,” 
interposed Mr. Furst. “We ask 
only that the bird be removed.” 

“If it were turned into the wilds 
be destroyed by spar- 
countered Mr. Halperin, 
whereupon the magistrate said: 
“I live near the old Bennett estate, 


Street, Brooklyn, where they have 


and he doesn't annoy me.” 


“I can't order the parrot de-| Marguerite Ford, estranged plural| American Woolen Company 


stroyed,” continued the court. “It 
the 


tion Is Suggested 


| 


If the student reaches into his 
pocket from either generosity or 
fearfulness, he must either fight 
his way out of the park or sur- 
render his money after a severe 
beating. In the case of one stu-| 
dent, his books were torn up when! 
his assailants discovered he had no) 
money. 


One boy was chased from the| 


park entrance after receiving sev- 
eral blows and found safety only 
on reaching the chemistry building 
on the campus. 

Another favorite approach, ac-| 
cording to the dean, is: “Have you! 
got a watch?” | 

One victim replied yes to the 
question and immediately lost his| 
watch. 

Since another victim was a Ne-| 
gro, Dr. Bergstresser pointed out) 
that the “epidemic” had nothing! 
to do with “race trouble” but was; 
a matter of stealing. 

He reported that two arrests 
had already been made and the at- 
tackers were being held. 

Oscar Buckvar, a member of the 
college’s Government Department, 
said that he felt the school should 
have its own police. 


GUILTY AS WIFE SLAYER 


Lewis Wolfe Convicted of First-| 
Degree Murder 


| 

Lewis Wolfe, 37-year-old sales-| 
man on trial for killing his wife, 
Paula Mona Wolfe, 26 years old, a 
fordmer Viennese actress, by beat-| 
ing her with a weighted shoe in 
| their room at the Hotel St. George, 
Brooklyn, on Dec. 30, was con- 
victed of first-degree murder early 
today in Kings County Court. The} 
jurors, after a charge by Judge} 
Louis Goldstein, took the case at! 
4:45 o'clock yesterday afternoon, | 
and returned their verdict at 
12:15 A. M. 

In finding the defendant guilty, 
the jury rejected his plea, made 
from the witness stand, that 
“voices” had commanded him to 
kill his wife, and that he had! 
obeyed. The State, in its case 
presented by Charles N. Cohen, 
assistant District Attorney, con- 
tended that he had killed his wife 
after she had admitted infidelity 
Nicholas Pecora was defense coun- 
sel. Wolfe was remanded to await 
sentence at a date not yet fixed 
Under the verdict the death pen- 
alty is mandatory. 


PRESSES AID TO VETERANS 


|Spokesman for Disabled Says 
| More Hospitalization Is Needed 


Hospitalization facilities and 
opportunities for the employment 
lof wounded veterans of this war 
will be needed on a larger scale 
than is now being planned, Milton 
D. Cohn of Buffalo, newly elected 





abled American Veterans, declared 
yesterday. 

Attending the annual meeting of 
the board of trustees of the Dis- 
abled American Veterans Service 
Foundation in the Hotel New York- 
er, the Veterans’ official referred 
ito the progress already made in 
{training wounded service men for| 
ifuture aid to their comrades in 
arms. 

In stressing the need for an ex- 
panded program, Mr. Cohn listed| 
the estimate of both Army and 
Veterans’ officials of the number of 
wounded in this war as 1,000,000. | 
This compares with 336,000 receiv-| 


ing treatment after the last war. 





EX-BANKER SENTENCED | 


15) 
Months for Stock Fraud 


Harvey H. Hevenor, 60-year-old 
former banker and promoter, was 
sentenced yesterday to fifteen 
months’ imprisonment for stock 
frauds of which he was convicted 
in Federal. court on Oct. 20. In 
passing sentence Judge Clarence 
G. Galston declined to follow a rec- 
ommendation of Edward C, Wal- 
lace, assistant United States at- 
torney, that Hevenor receive the 
maximum penalty of five years. 

The defendant was found guilty, 


|President Eduard Benes of Czecho-|1245 Amsterdam Avenue, was saidjon evidence presented by Mr. Wai- 


lace, of selling stock in General 
Ordnance Company, Inc., for $75,- 
000, on the false representation 
that the concern was about to fill 
large orders for a.: armament fuse. 
{Actually the fuse was not ready 
|for production. 


ZAHNE PLEADS NOT GUILT 


Trial of Realty Man on Pro-Nazi 
Charges Set for Nov. 20 


Louis Archer Zahne, 56-year-old 
real estate broker who was in- 
dicted Monday for making false 
denials of Nazi affiliations in 
testimony before an Army board 
of inquiry, pleaded not guilty yes- 
terday in Federal court. Judge 
Samuel Mahdelbaum, setting bail 
at $3,500, put the case over for 
trial Nov. 20. 

Described as one of the ablest 
speakers and propagandists of the 
pre-war pro-Nazi movement in 
this country, “Zahne was accused 
of having made false statements 
last year while the Army was 
studying whether he should be 
allowed to remain in this strategic 
defense area. Zahne has an office 
at 248 Lexington Avenue. 


_ Indicted in Polygamy Cases 
SALT LAKE CITY, Oct. 31 (® 
—A Federal grand jury has in- 
dicted three persons for intimida- 
tion of witnesses in actions 
against Fundamentalists accused 
Edna Christensen 


gamy. Miss 


|the only rooster in that borough,}and Mrs. Rula K. Broadbent are quest for a flat ten-cent hy 


accused of attempting to coerce 


wife of Follis Gardner Petty, 


wisdom of aj|from testifying against him. David| Textile Workers Union, 


25 
L 


FINANCES OF CITY. 
IMPROVED BY WAR 


McGoldrick Points to Drop in 
Outlays, 8 Per Cent Rise in 
Income and Tax Rate Cut 


BUT WARNS CHANGE |S DUE 


| 


When Peace Comes the Trend 
Will Be Reversed, Budgets 
Will Go Up, He Says 


Wartime conditions that brought 
a@ sharp reduction in capital im 
provements, repair and mainte- 
nance, a substantial drop the 
number of city employes because 
many were called into 
Service, and a ten-year low 
home relief expenditures 
in an improvement in 
financial position for 
year 1943-44, Controller 
McGoldrick declared 
his annual report. Wartime 
and industrial activity 
helped to make the genera! 
revenues $21,000,000 


in 
aii 


military 
tor 


resuited 


the v's 


the fisca! 


Joseph [ 


yesterda 


ness 


hicher 


ign 


;estimated and 8 per cent h 


than the previous year 

the tax rate, he said. 
But the impact 

already decreasing 


red: 
reau 
ine 


u“ 


of u 


and when 
tory comes in Europe 

will be reversed and the ci 
have to meet “very heavy charges 
on future budgets 
adding that “it is not too 
begin looking ahead to the 
lems.” 


Big Outlays After War 


“With the ending of the 
Europe, many, if 
wartime trends will 
verse, although their 
will not be felt until th: 
Japan is won,” he 
city it will mean providi 
ture budgets for the 
employes returning from 
Service, for major 
physical plant, for repl: 
worn-out equipment Yr 
ration of curtailed services and 
though we hope ; 
creased burden of relief 
forms of welfare assistarn 
I will not attempt to f 
Size, it is clear 
will involve 


ar tre 


ty 


Y Wi 


he 


warned 


early tn 


rio ail 
begin 
full 


— 


Saic 


rer 


not ar 
and 
od \\ 
re int ? 
these 


that 
increases 


| budgets.”’ 


The city’s 1944-45 exper 
et of $737,400,923. with 
total of $606,364.464 
with a tax levy total 
615 in the previ yea 
in a current tax rate of $2.74 
point drop below the 1943-44 bas 
rate. 

Mr. McGoldrick's 
cated that the calling of 
ployes into military 
number at the peak 
with not more than 
tutes replacing them—enabled the 
administration to save $11.676.496 

, 
“@ 


report 

cit’ 

service 
was 


8 500 


subdst 


in salaries, $2,414,204 in wages a 
$1,307,955 in reimbursable salar 
and wages from budget appror 

tions, although it sought t 

the increased cost of livir 
viding $26,000,000 in 
salary adjustments 

Home-relief 
$12,000,000, the amour! 
ten years. The Controller recalle 
that the city’s share « 
lief costs reached a high of 
000,000 in 1937, the bottom 
depression 

The city’s bonded 
was reduced by $97,900,860, 
net total of $2,283,240.503 
city’s margin debt 
power Was increased 
074,620 for the previous fi 
to $273,582,144 
The unreserved marg 
dropped to $29,907,566 « 
1940, after a period of heavy 
tal expenditures. 

Temporary Debt Sharply Cu 
The city’s temporary debt 
$56,900,000 on June 30 
amount outstanding at a 
since 1928 and $28,160,000 
than at the close of the 1942-43 fis- 

cal year 

Once again reflecting 
|prosperity, tax collections 
}a new record rate in proporti 
llevies, with only 6.29 per cent 
ithe current levy uncollected at the 
jend of the fiscal year, the C 
jtroller said. Actual collections 
|taled 93.29 per cent, or almost two 
|percentage points higher than the 
previous year, which had 2 
twenty-year record. 

The report showed the city real 
ized a surplus of $5,944,126 in the 
operation of the expense budget 
;with revenues at $731,319,531 
|total city and county expenses 
| $725,375,406. The surplus included 
'$1,030,877, representing gains due 
jto extending the tax rate to the 
nearest hundredth of a cent on 
each dollar. 

Total education expenditures 
| were $1,979,862 less than the $190,- 
476,706 provided in the budget 
| Police costs were $1,127,370 higher 
than the budget appropriations of 
| $64,267,622, while in Fire Depart- 
|}ment costs a saving of $2,541,026 
|was effected on budget appropria- 
|tions of $38,908,625. Under police 
| pensions, non-actuarial pension 
|funds cost $2,227,403 more than the 
| $7,328,000 provided in the budget 
| Civilian defense cost a total of 
| $281,050, as against $50,000 in the 
budget. 

Actual revenues from all sources 
totaled $731,319,531, or $6,341,245 
less than estimated, with earnings 
from the city’s unified transit sys- 
tem totaling $16,630,730, against 
an estimated $20,000,000. 


y ho ne 
iz UY 


cr 


* , i+ - 
expend ires 


le west nt 
me-re 
$60.- 


of the 


ot 
frory 
tt 

sé 


on June 


cart 
‘ 
' 


} 


the west 


| nv time 


2 


at 


wart 
were 


aft 


\Te 


set 





ae 
| Panel Against Textile Pay Rise 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 (»— 


es 


lat Shore Road and Seventy-fifth|of preaching and practicing poly-|A War Labor Board panel recom- 


mended today the denial of a re- 
jcrease for 20,000 employes of the 
The 
employes, represented by the CIO 
work in 


The panel said the 


tal budget. 
for the year anticipates more than|partment of Justice, “and they as-|/ance carrier.” The court did not|place the bird at sunrise near an/| with the chief magistrate, you two/to go into hiding 80 ghe could not|proposed general wage increase 
open window, subjecting the other|lawyers get together and try tojtestify against him and Heber/‘“would require a revision of the 


$150,000,000 in Federal and State sured us they would institute the pass on Mrs. Pell’'s claim for| 


funds. necessary proceedings.” services. 


tenants to what he described as*a 


come to some agreement.” 


K®nbali Cleveland. 


Little Steel formula.” 





SAYS WAR IS ISSUE 
DECIDING WOMEN 


Mrs. Roosevelt Calls Building 
for Peace a Part of It—Hits 
Playing Up of Vexations 


Special to Tux New Yorxw Timrs 

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—The 
campaign issue which will decide 
the women’s vote in next Tuesday’s 
election is war, Mrs. Roosevelt told 
a press conference today, the last 
before she will go to Hyde Park to 
vote. | 

When questioned, she said she; 
included making the peace as part 
of that issue. She said further that} 
if not wanting to have another war) 
meant that women were interna-| 
tional-minded, then they were | 
international-minded. 

She termed “silly and rather in-| 
sulting’ a reported campaign ap-| 
peal to women based on their pos- 
sible feeling of annoyance at OPA 
restrictions. ] 

“I should think women whose, 
husbands and sons are fighting mi 
the jungle would resent the impli- 
cation that they would object to| 
such slight matters as price ceil-| 
ings and dress slips being stand-| 
ardized,”’ she commented. 

The President’s wife said she 
never made an election forecast 
nor a wager. As to attitudes, she 
said that she was “constitutionally 
a pessimist.” 

Mrs. Roosevelt's question-and- 
answer period, however, was 
usually light, its tone perhaps set 
by the gay bit of morning attire— 
she was wearing a bright red over- 
blouse bordered in gold sequin 
scrolls 

She went over her own tradi- 
tional election routine: luncheon 
the Saturday before with the coun 
ty women workers in the Bronx; a 
speech in Peekskill on the way to 
Hyde Park; the Democratic rally 
in Hyde Park Saturday night. She} 
said she would tell them all that 
she hoped that people would vote 

She dryly described election 
night at the Roosevelts in these 
words 

“Election nights are always ex- 
actly the same. You get reports 
and everybody reads them and 
tabulates percentages. There's a 
buffet supper early and another 
late at night, and the press is apt 
to come up late in the evening.’ 

She obligingly reported on the) 
family: Three sons, Col. James 
Roosevelt, Lieut. Comdr. Franklin 
Roosevelt Jr. and Lieut. John 
Roosevelt are in the Pacific area; 
Col. Elliot Roosevelt is in the Eu- 
ropean theatre; Daughter Anna, 
Mrs. John Boettiger is here. The 
youngest son, John, has been on an| 
aircraft carrier with Admiral Hal- 
sey for six months. 

Asked about a rumor that her 
husband's campaign managers had 
been “keeping her in cold storage,”’ 
she laughed and said, “I have had 
no suggestion made to me of any 
kind.” 

Queried as to whether she would 
be glad when election was over, 
she said: 

“If you mean whether or not I 
mind campaigns, I don't mind 
them all But I will be giad 
when it is over, because it puts an 
added amount of work on every- 
one who had a full-time job any- 
how and had to add a campaign 
From that standpoint, everyone in 
the White House will be glad to 
have it over.” 


NEW POWDER ON MARKET 


Face Product Introduced by 
Westmore Has No Coloring 


j 
j 


un- 


at 


A new type of face 
which is designed especially for 
tinted powder foundations, is jin- 
troduced today by Westmore. The 
powder is named “Overglo,” and it 
comes in just one “non-chromatic” 
shade—pale pink. It has an ex- 
tremely light texture, with the 
slippery, fluffy feeling of a talcum 
powder. 

The powder was formulated to 
have almost no opacity or color- 
ing. To be used with any colored 
foundation—liquid, cream or cake 
——the powder is the result of the 
Westmore theory that these new 
foundations have the necessary 
color and covering power, and that 
therefore the new function of a 
face powder is to provide only a 
fine film that reduces shininess 
and gives the complexion a soft, 
dull effect 


powder, 





a oa en ae 


| Society 


DINETTE CORN 


THE RETURN OF EVENING 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 
THREE FOODS OF THE SEASON IN NEW GUISE 


ELEGANCE 


i 


Gown of flame-red satin polka-dotted in black whose full skirt is 


caught in a pouff at the side. Designed by Omar Kiam. Jewels from | 
Van Cleef & Arpels. Seen yesterday at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel. 


OMAR KIAM SHOWS | 


‘COMPLETE’ WOMAN 


Designs Dresses and Hats and 
Selects Jewels and Other 
Accessories in Ensemble 


By VIRGINIA POPE 

It was of especial value to see, 
at yesterday's showing in the Oval 
of the Ritz Carlton Hotel, 
just how a designer thinks 
woman should look when 
pletely “ensembled” by him in the 
matter of dress, hat, jewels and 
other accessories. Omar Kiam was 
the sole exhibitor. The collection 


to0om 
a 


com- 


included some of his fall and win-| 


some ofl 
mid- 


as 


new 


ter successes as well 
the models from his 
winter and resort collection, which 
will not be available to the public 
until a much later date. 
Among his already 
models were the Edwardian suits 
that have by now become an 
acknowledged part of the fashion 
picture, The shoulder-length cape- 
lets on suits were seen in black 
and red and black checked woolen 
The fingertip cape to which he has 
given such elegance was shown 
in a gray version with the cape 
lined in “chinchilla” rabbit and an- 
other tobacco-brown lined in black 
American sheared lamb 
With one exception, Omar Kiam 
designed the hats that graced his 
They were very flattering 
Large shapes were en- 
with lush roses of mous- 
seline. Pale pink and blue were 
on a black velvet worn with a 
black crépe dress that had a band 
of black velvet ribbon placed diago- 
nally across the shirt front A 
black fox tail was swankily placed 
across the front of a turban—the 
same fur was used in a muff— 
that gave a dramatic accent to a 
red crépe, street-length dinner 
dress that sparkled lightly with 
the glimmer of gold sequins on 
skirt and sleeves 
Omar Kiam’'s 


act epted 


models 
in type 
hanced 


newest line was 


NUTRITIONIST TO RETIRE 


Miss Lucy H. Gillett Ending 30 
Years With Agency 


Retirement of Miss Lucy H. Gil 
lett as director of the nutrition 
bureau of the Community Service 
after thirty years of 


ER FOR THE 
ae ‘¥ 


* 2a 
te hts 


© 


? 


a 


POTTERY COLLECTOR 
Biwi Visig | 


Choice of Station Lapses 
For Wac Recruits Today 


Special to Taz New York Times 


WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—This 
was the last day on which a Wac 
recruit had a choice of job and 
station. Army posts, which were 
very short of complementary 
personnel in February, were 
allowed to recruit Wacs for par- 
ticular jobs. The need now is for 
a more flexible personnel who 
can be assigned anywhere. 

Those who join the Wacs now 
still have the choice of serving 
with the air forces, ground forces 
or service forces and may still 
choose to serve as medical tech- 
nicians 

The last count of Wac strength 
was more than 85,000. Women ia 
the Army total 126,000, which 
include women doctors, Wac, 
nurses, dietitians and physical 
therapy aides. 


seen in evening gowns both fer- 
He has evolved 
wraps about 


mal and informal 
a svelte drape that 
the hips, draping from front to 
back in a diagonal line. Amaz- 
ingly, this looped drape in no way 
makes the figure look heavier. On 
the contrary, it seems to add to 
height and silenderness. It was 
shown on black crépes made with 
deep V décolletage and on a lime- 
light crépe—this gown was first 
presented at Times Hall in 
“Fashions of the Times,” third 
edition, last week. The beautiful 
creation, with its flowing 
that falls from the left shoulder, 
was received with enthusiastic 
applause 

Departing from his draped sil- 
houette, the designer offered a 
young and picturesque gown of 
flame-red satin polka-dotted in 
black. The skirt was caught in a 
full pouff over the left hip. Very 
sophisticated was an evening en- 
semble with a boxy black satin 
coat and satin tunic 
ping a black crépe skirt. 

The Edwardian’ choker 
Omar Kiam has strongly endorsed 
was worn with the majority of the 
costumes All the jewelry was 
from Van Cleef & Arpels. 


service was announced yesterday. 

Miss Gillett was a pioneer in 
nutrition and for years was the 
only nutritionist in the welfare 
field. She is the author of various 
popular and scientific books on 
nutrition and is a charter member 
of the Home Economics Associa- 
tion, founded in 1909. Her retire- 
ment will take effect today. 


. 


¥ 


scarf! 


blouse top-| 


that} 


ARMY OFFERS JOBS 
TN CLOTHING REPAIR 


CDVO Helps in Drive to Get 
400 Workers for Jersey City 
Quartermaster Depot 


Because “offensive warfare is 
rougher on clothing and equipment 
|than the defensive war we 
fighting last year,” 
paid workers are needed imme- 
|diately at the Jersey City Quar- 
|termaster Depot, 125 West End 
Avenue, Manhattan, Lieut. 
/William H 
|cer, disclosed yesterday 


With Capt. Charles Lamm _ of- 


| for 
|from the Pershing Square Infor- 
j}mation Center, sponsored by the 
Civilian Defense Volunteer Office. 

To assist the Quartermaster 
Corps in its drive for workers, the 
CDVO is devoting its window dis- 
play this week to the depot’s work, 
showing two sewing machine 
operators repairing stacks of GI 
khaki garments, “slightly the 
worse for wear and war,” 
CDVO volunteer remarked. An 
exhibit showing the clothing and 
equipment “before and after” re- 
furbishing has also been installed 
as a permanent booth at the 
center. 

Second Lieut, 
and Mrs. Rose T. Sills, a Civil 
Service worker, staff a booth 
where workers may apply for po- 
Sitions at the depot. Applicants 
may sign up between 9 A. M. and 
\9 P. M. More than fifty persons 
lalready have applied, Mrs. Sills 
|said yesterday. 
| A thousand workers are em- 
ployed already at the depot in the 
“Army behind the Army,” Colonel 
Lee revealed. Since its inception, on 
July 1, 1943, $37,000,000 worth of 
equipment has been handled at a 
repair cost of 1542 per cent. In 
ja recent month, Colonel Lee re- 
ported, “we received damaged, 
ripped or torn clothing and equip- 
ment the repaired value of which 
was $2,346,000," and that “a little 
less than $310,000 was spent to 
reclaim these Army goods, showing 
a resultant saving of almost 
$2,036,000 in one month alone.” 

Sixty per cent of the openings 
for workers at the depot, Colonel 
Lee said, are for women, 


Stella G. Garvin 


kind of civilian worker’ was 
needed. Among the categories he 
mentioned were sorters, examiners, 
distributors, power sewing machine 
|operators, laborers and janitors. 
|In addition to applying at the 
'CDVO Pershing Square informa- 
tion center Colonel Lee said infor- 
mation on job openings might be 
obtained from the Army employ- 
ment office at the depot or at the 
Civil Service employment office at 
641 Washington Street 

Captain Lamm explained that 
“the salaries paid to workers at 
the depot are in accord with Civil 
Service regulations,’ ranging from 
sixty-four to seventy-nine cents an 
hour for jobs now open. The depot 
operates on a _  forty-eight-hour 
work week, Captain Lamm said, 
with time and a half after forty 
hours, “Soldiers of supply’ with a 
steady six-month record of work 
receive a special service emblem. 

CDVO officials said this was the 
first tine their organization had 
helped in a drive for paid workers. 

“CDVO is doing it at the request 
of the Army to aid the war effort,” 
they explained 


SURVEY GETS DATA 
| ON SHEET CHANGING 


How often the average house- 
wife changes her sheets has been 


line topic to a matter of cold statis- 
tics by the results of a survey re- 
leased today by the Pepperell 


Manufacturing Company. The can-| 


vass reveals that the balance in 
favor of changing two sheets on 
each bed hangs by a thread since 
46 per cent of the women inter- 
viewed change one sheet a bed dur- 
ing the week, while 47 per cent 
put both sheets into the wash. 

Texture and long wear are the 
points that count most with sheet 
buyers, although the survey fur- 
ther indicates that more than dou- 
ble the pre-war interest has been 
demonstrated in favor of colored 
sheets. This increase may be con- 
isidered of special interest since it 
has been found that only 77 out 
of 1,000 housewives have ever 
jactually bought colored sheets 

The average family is said to 
}own three beds and five sheets for 
each of them—figures which 
should add up to an annual busi- 
ness of 100,000,000 sheets in the 
| United States. 


Col. | 
Lee, commanding offi-| 


ficer in charge of the clothing and} 
textile repair division at the depot, 
| Colonel Lee broadcast an appeal | 
workers over Station WNYC} 


as a! 


though | 
‘he emphasized that “almost every| 


rai 


| 


were | 
400 additional 





Sausage, sweet potatoes and pears—ali plentiful this fall—furnish | 
| unusual main course when the meat is browned, the potatoes trans- 


YARN MADE OF FURS 
MAKES DEBUT HERE 


Natura, a new yarn spun from 
the real hairs of mink, muskrat 
or silver fox and woven into fab- 
rics, made its debut yesterday at 
a show held at the Hotel Waldorf- 
Astoria. The fabric, as it is used 
in dresses, is made up of 20 per 
cent of the fur fibers, 70 per cent 
rayon and 10 per cent wool. A new 
Blendlok process, exclusive in Na- 
tura Yarns, makes the fur fiber 
an integral part of the yarn and 
eliminates any possibility of shed- 
ding. The fabric has more signifi 
cance for post-war use than now 


as the 
is necessarily 
The ne 
mere in appearance 
and, according to Davi 
who was responsible f 
dress styles developed 
well. The give 
muted look that 
tractive the 
has been dyed 


nresent j 
presente 


4 


2 (oodcs 


» th 
athe S 
1! 
IS par 
paste 


A 


Alor 
«Va 


was 
silver 
sisted of per ce 
cent wool and 25 per 
These are 5 
Teller in New 
of the limited 
will be confined 
city throughout 


fox hairs 


50) 
ay 1L1avie 
Yi 
ary 


+ 


From a 


Wine Cookbook 


formed into patties and sautéed and fruit stewed and filled with jelly. K 
(Recipe for this dish appears today) 


News of Food 


at Department St 


By JANE HOLT 

Five thousand pounds of butter 
have just been received by Hearns, 
jand are scheduled to go on sale 
‘tomorrow in the grocery depart- 
jment in the basement. The first 
14,000 pounds to be sold will be 
allotted to customers on a one- 
|pound-apiece basis, the remainder 
|to be apportioned in half pounds. 
| Personally, this department 
jfinds it hard to understand how 
janyone can afford twenty points 
|for a pound of butter. and yet we 
are assured by members of the 
|trade that there are a good many 
persons who will buy just about as 
}much as they can lay hand to. 
|Such individuals will welcome this 
|news, then, for undoubtedly most 
jof them have been limited lately to 
quarter-pound purchases. The but- 
jter, which comes from Minnesota, 
as might be guessed from the 
trade-name, Gopher State, is 93- 
score, the highest grade. It is 
|salted, comes in print form and 
icosts 51 cents a pound. 








| Spice Supplies Eased 
|tions in the Atlantic, a half-dozen 
sources of spice supplies have been 
opened up, perhaps the most sig- 
nificant being Madagascar, which 
lis starting to send cloves. The 
American Spice Trade Association 
jsays that the small, nail-shaped, 
|brown buds, so necessary in baked 








| 
| 


| 


| 








5,000 Pounds of Butter Will Go on Sale 
ore H 


° 


ere Tomorrow 


Apples A-Plenty 


The War Food Administration 
is allocating to civilians 83 per 
cent of the current apple crop. 
This may not be enough to per- 
mit everyone to follow the apple- 
a-day regime, but at least it 
will give us thirty-eight pounds 
apiece during the season, which 
is thirteen pounds more than 
last year. 

The amount is estimated not 
only on the basis of fresh sup- 
plies, but also on stocks of apple 
products — canned and _ quick- 
"frozen, butter and jelly, cider 
and vinegar. The only thing 
unavailable will be dried apples, 
all of which go to the Govern- 
ment. These are not so impor- 
tant as they used to be inasmuch 
as most of the fresh are now 
kept in cold storage or tinned 
or frozen, 





and Spain—is being resorted to as 


Because of eased shipping condi-|a pinch hitter to some extent. 


Shopping Notes: Herring fillets) 
that have been wrapped around! 
dill pickles and packed in an onion-| 
seasoned distilled vinegar are to 
be found at Macy’s. They are| 
called roll mops, the brand is Max-| 
im’s and the cost is 47 cents for a 


ham and mince meat, have not) fourteen-ounce jar. They are a nice 
|been too plentiful, though, happily,| addition to an hors d’oeuvre tray. 


the scarcity has been felt more in 
|wholesale than in retail markets. 
|Zanzibar—which, in case you for- 
|get your geography, is 
|Africa—is also contributing the 
seasoning. The best quality, how- 
jever, the tops in appearance and 
flavor, is still missing, since it is 
or was—grown in the Netherlands 
‘Indies, in the South Pacific 


ifor spice are Bulgaria and the 
|Mediterranean island of Cyprus, 
lboth of which are furnishing, 
jamong other things, anise. This 


Madagascar on the east coast of) substitute. 


| 


Two other newly opened sources | cos/eg 


| 


| 


licorice-like seed—it likewise hails} 


ifrom Peru, Mexico and Spain—has 
|been proposed often by the asso- 
ciation as a temporary substitute 
|for cinnamon, which is short inas- 


;much as it is derived in peacetime) ° 


from Ceylon, China and the Neth- 
erlands Indies. 
An old story has it that French 


| 


| 


|bakers first began sifting a little} 


anise into the bottom of their 
|}would absorb the flavor and be as 
jappealing to consumers as the de- 
lliciously soft section of the loaf. 
/Their trick was so successful that 
the spice has become traditional 
jin many of the bakery products of 
|Latin peoples. Try it yourself 
|}some time in place of cinnamon in 
japple pie or applesauce. 

| Among the most unavailable 
seasoning at the moment is onion 
|salt, which originates in California 
jand which is employed in vast 
|quantities by the Army for con- 
|venience. Fortunately, we have 
| good alternates in whole, minced 
jonion or “liquid onion,” the com- 
|mercially prepared concentrate to 
|be had in groceries. Even more 
| scarce is poppy seed, the only spice 
that is blue in color. This delicacy, 
imparting a nutty savor to breads 
}and pastries, was imported for- 
|merly from Hungary, the Nether- 
jlands and Germany, and is so mi- 
nute in size that it takes 900,000 
seeds to make a pound. Caraway 


|—-from Cali@rnia, Canada, Syria 


| Halloween Party Given to Youngsters 
For Help in the Paper Salvage Campaign 


> 


Early American reproductions acquire individuality when set with a miscellany of bright accessories. 


The Fireside Shop at Namm’s. 


A dinette furnished with simple|of fine china, the cool neutral,covered soup bowls. The pair of 


maple pieces—whether they are 
genuine early American or frankly 
reproductions—offers a made-to- 
order opportunity for the home- 
maker who likes to collect bright 
and amusing accessories 


and cabinets of a more formal din- 


ing room that seem to call for| water jug with a green grapeede-|they happen to 
* groups'sign, the green leaf fruit dish, the|them 


polished silver and mate" 


Unlike} 
the imposing dark wood buffets) 


background of a maple dresser 
welcomes an assortment of bright 
pottery assembled with cheerful 
disregard of age or value or na- 
tionality. 

Several of the , ttery pieces in 
this collection hail from Portugal 


;—on the table, the rich brown 


sedate hens as well as the crowing 
rooster on the dresses were im- 
|ported from the same country. Yet 
|they seem right at home with the 
jearly American antique plates and 
jeven the simple cream-colored pot- 
tery mugs that have no relation to 
jany of the other things except that 
look well with 


A cart load of baled newspapers, 
wheeled recklessly along the side- 


yesterday gained him last-minute 


|the Park Hudson 
|Depot of the American Women's 
| Voluntary Services at 2800 Broad- 
| way. 





reached out for his admittance 
ticket, left his cart standing in the 
hall and dashed up the stairs, to 
be lost among 124 other mas- 
queraders in the costumes of Har- 
lequins, witches and hobgoblins. 
The party was held to celebrate 
the success of the October salvage 
drive, during which 1,000 boys and 
girls from the neighborhood col- 
lected fifteen tons of waste paper. 
Honor guests at the party—those 
who had collected at least 150 
pounds of paper—played special 
Hallowe'en games, danced 
sang, and ate a large amount of 


candy, cookies and ice cream pops. | 


In a room hung with black and 
orange streamers and lanterns, its 
walls decorated with painted 
witches, jack-o-lanterns, skeletons 
and big black cats, the children 
were inducted into the AWVS Sea- 
bees, a city-wide organization for 
boys and girls who assist in sal- 
Sage drives. 

Mrs. Vincent 


walks by a masked young man;| 


Making the final contribu-| 
tion which filled his quota of 150) 
pounds of salvaged paper, the boy | 


and! 


chairman, and Mrs. Louise Sonjou, 
| vice chairman of the AWVS unit, 
|presented the awards. 
prizes w 
years old, 


|bringing in 980 pounds of paper. 


Y 2) 


\ 


) 


used in the 


S 
? 
5 
2 
) 


by RICHARD HUDNUT 


2 





| 


elevated from an over-the-clothes-|>read pans, so that the hard crust) 


| 


| 





DIAERYLAE IED LAEDISE 


DL BARRY FACE POWDER 


Bloomingdale's is selling a) 


pure, rendered chicken fat that is | 


useful in kosher cookery and prac-| 


north of/tical in any cuisine as a butter | 


Five-and-a-half-pound | 


tins are $6.25 each. 


MENUS FOR TOMORROW 


Breakfast 
Applesauce’ 
Plaked cereai with milk 
cake (purchased or quick homemade) 
Coffee Milk j 


Lunch 


Creamed chicken* on toast 
Pickles Radishes 
Cocoa rice pudding* with cream 
Milk or tea 


Dinner 


Sausage and sweet petete palties with atewed 
pears® stuffed with jelly Harvard Beets 
Celery and cabbage slaw 
Fruit sherbet (purchased) 
ies (purchased) Tea or coffee 
Leftover. 


SAUSAGE AND SWEET POTATO} 
PATTIES (T-T)** 


1 pound pork sausage links 

2 tablepsoons water 

2 cups hot mashed sweet potatoes 

% cup milk 

2 tablepsoons butter or fortified 
margarine 

14 teaspoon salt 

1 tablepsoon brown sugar or 
molasses. 

Put sausage and water in a cold 
skillet, cover and steam five min- 
utes. Drain off any remaining 
water and cook slowly, uncovered, 
turning frequently, until well 
browned and thoroughly cooked. 
Mix sweet potatoes and remaining 
ingredients, shape into balls and 
brown in sausage drippings. Serve 
with stewed pear halves filled with| 
jelly. Serves four. 

**(T-T) — TIMES - tested. This 
recipe has been tried in THE NEW 
YORK TIMES kitchen. 

Questions concerning rationing 
and other food problems may be 
submitted by telephone, LA 4-6324, 
except Saturdays and Sundays, or 
by writing to the Food News Edi- 
tor, THE NEW YoRK TIMES, 


Woman Marine Launches Ship 
RICHMOND, Calif., Oct. 31 (| 


|—Sgt. Eleanor Segley of Bucyrus, 


Ohio, a member of the Marine 
Corps Women Reserve, today 
christened the Bucyrus Victory, 
the 611th vessel launched by Henry 
J. Kaiser’s Richmond yards. Her 


Special|jfather, Gale Segley, who headed 
ent to Jeffery Garges, 14/the Bucyrus Victory Ship Commit- 
Sie : who collected 1,340/tee which raised enough money in 
admission to a Hallowe'en party at| hounds of paper, and to Sylvia|war bond sales to pay for the vic- 
Unit Salvage! Sandor, 13, who was credited with|tory ship, was “triggerman” at the 


launching. 


The Face Powder 


famous Du Barry 
Success School 


| 
" 


You've tasted wine-cookery in fine 
restaurants. Now discover what 
goodness wine can bring to 

your own cooking! 


Wa tsps. salts 

wine. Shape 
oil and broil 
- hot skillet, 
ine to fot 


Claret 


Serve the same wine with the meal 


You'll enjoy the 


with hearty dishes like the ham 


‘As a companion 
fish, try the more 


M of red table wine 
urger steaks above. 
to lighter foods like chicken and 
delicate white table wines such az 


taste harmon 


California Sauterne and Rhine Wine. 


For evening entertainin 
California an may | 
Let your dealer he 


9 some 
and Port on hand, 
Ip you select them, 


Wine fs Fun tells about diferent 
kinds of wine and how you can 
serve and enjoy them 

How to Cook with Wine introduces 
new adventures in good eating 
Get them at dealers —or write 
Wine Advisory Board, 85 Second 
St., San Francisco 5, California 


BUY WAR BONDS FODAY...fFOR TOMORROW 


COLLEGE INN FOQD PRODUCTS CO., 4301 South Ashiand Avenue, Chicage 8, lilinele 


: 
THE BEST 
and PROUD of it! 


. 


An unforgettable bitter-sweet orange 
flavor—never successfully imitcted. 
C&B PURE Orange Marmcicde con- 
tains only finest cane suger, selected 
Seville oranges, thinly-shredded, tasty 
peel. Made from the famous formula 
created in the eighteenth century ond 


never changed. It's the ORIGINAL 


CROSSE & BLACKWELL. 


ORA 





(2) Rid garbage pails of of- 
fensive odors—after wash- 
ing, sprinkle in one or more 
tablespoons OD-30 powder, 
add hot water, swish around, 


then rinse 


NGE MARMALADE 


FINE FOODS SINCE !706 


(1) Quick, easy way to flush 
out sinks. drains: use table- 
spoon or two of OD-30 pow- 
der in a dishpan of hot 
water to give you OD-39 
‘pink magic” solution; flush, 
then rinse with fresh water, 


@) Has no odor... leaves no odor 


> | | (3) Get the PINK-STRIPED package — get rid 
Three Months’ | of cooking oders and other unwanted smelis. 


Average Supply 


Lippe, salvage © OAQGN@SZAQENRSO DADE DADENO DADE 


At grocery, drug, hardware stores 
49c PACKAGE MAKES 32 QTS. 
+ 


National Distributer | 


@. C. WILLIAMS & CO.. Iac., New York, & & 


5 





BARUNA, 20-1, BEATS 


CARIBOU BY LENGTH 


Horse Recently Claimed for! 
$3,000 Surprises in Rich 
Daingerfield Handicap 


BREAKS JAMAICA RECORD|* 





| 
Races 2 Miles and Sixteenth 
in 3:3424—Atkinson Gets | 
Triple, Meade a Double | 

By BRYAN FIELD 

Baruna, a 5-year-old who had! 
not scored in a 1944 race, was the 
surprise winner of the $10,275) 
Daingerfield Handicap at Jamaica) 
yesterday, where the Empire City|j 
Racing Association renewed one of, 
the longest races run in this coun-| 
try. 

‘Named for the former official of 
the Jockey Club, Algernon Dain- 
gerfield, who was a devotee of dis- 
tance racing, the test is at two 
miles and a sixteenth and yester-| 
day attracted eight horses and 20,- 
523 spectators. 

The horses had a hard time get- 
ting around the track, and the 
spectators had a hard time believ- 
ing this was the same old Baruna 
who had won only two out of fif-| 
teen last year and failed in eleven) 


starts during the current cam- 
paign before the Daingerfield. 


Eddie Coates Saddles Winner 


Only about a week ago Baruna} 
was claimed for $3,000 and yester- 
day there he was earning $6,775) 
for Mrs. C. E. Coates, the new 
owner. Eddie Coates, former! 
jockey and now a trainer, saddled 
the brown son of Annapolis and he} 
may have been almost as surprised} 
as some others when the horse re- 
turned 20 to 1 after finishing the} 
long route ahead of Caribou by a 
length. 

The time of 3:342-5 set a new) 
track record, but that isn't re- 
garded as too important since the| 
distance is run only once a year. | 
In the 1943 renewal Resolute II set) 
the old mark of 3:35 4-5. 

Charlie Wahler handled the win- 
ner and, in common with the other} 
riders, was pretty much out of| 
wind after passing before the spec- 
tators three times. Eight lengths 


c 





t 


back of Caribou finished Sammy} . 


Angott, who with his stablemate, 
Eye for Eye, was the public choice. 
Keen as was Wahler’s effort 
aboard Baruna, riding honors on 
the day went to Ted Atkinson and| 
Don Meade who gained five win-| 
ners between them. Atkinson land- 
ed the triple with Our Doris, War 
Date and Rath Ronan. Meade was 
up on Fire High and Tarpan. 


$2,175,745 Betting Day 


It was a brisk afternoon for the! 
track, the total betting reaching 
$2,175,745, precisely $361,519 of it 
being on the feature. 

When the break came Crystal 
with the feather of 100 pounds,| 
dashed away to the lead. Baruna, 
also in very light with 107, was in 
close pursuit. There was little ac- 
tion the first and second times past 
the stand. 

Approaching the far turn the! ¥ 
final time Caribou began to make) 
up ground from a rear guard po-| 
sition. Forging steadily 
with his 126 pounds, he was in 
front at the top of the stretch.| 
There Baruna still was a con-} 
tender. Wahler asked for speed 
through the stretch and the old 
gelding was able to respond with! 
enough to overcome. the 
weighted Caribou. 

As the line was crossed Baruna| 
was drawing steadily away with! 
Wahler driving for all he was} 
worth. The winner was next to the} 
outsider, the only longer price being | 
that against Crystal who even- 
tually finished last. 


Daily Double Returns $22.10 


N 





N 


si J 


| 


5 





a 


a 


2-year-olds 
Winner 
| 1:14 2- 


Fire High 
Walger 
Trace Man 
Try 


Down Stage 
Scratched—Vaidina Autumn, Wise Rebus, Lucky Roman Count Bill 


Thorn 


Crazy Horse 


Albuldo 
Napoo 
Darby Divot 
My 
Handsome Boy 
Grandpa Jim 
Love 


Our Doris 
Blue Ridge . 
Rush Light 


Trial 
Ute 


E. Zantker 


FOURTH RACE—The Oak Summit 
Start good; won easily; place same. Went to post 
Admiral—Late 


War Date.... 


Princess 
Turbulence 
Timore 


| Wire Briar 
Nuala 


w 
| off 3:47 


track 


onward! arena 


Perfect 


Adaptable 
Oatmeal 
Crystal 
aHavahome Stable-N. G. Gibbons entry 
Scratched—Farsight 


top| vy 


ward 
Winner 
| Stephens 


Starters 


Tarpan 
| Hadawin 
Thread 
Y 
Noonday 
Water 


” 


oa é 
‘ © pees 


oe es 


Baruna beating out Caribou to win the fifth race at Jamaica 


JAMAICA RACING CHAR 


|: 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


& 


T | 


(Empire City Meeting) 


By The Associated Press 


Tuesday, Oct. 31. 


FIRST RACE—Purse $2,500: 
six furlongs. Start good: 
br. g., 2, 


5 


Starters P 4 


11 
2: 
6 
Hal 34 
“ircus Flag 41 


108 5! Ly 


Eighth day. Weather clear. 
claiming price $3,000-$2,000; for maidens, colts and geldings, Devil Diver and Megogo Meet 


b won easily 
by Firozepore—High Flight, by High Time. Trainer, F 


6 


Track fast. 


place same. Went to post 1:47, off 1 48, 


J. Scott. Time— 


—Mutuels—, Dollar 
Sh. Odds 

2 1.00 

7.50 

2.80 3.90 

. 10.25 

4.75 


.... 25.00 


Meade 
Roberts 
> Pittarelli 
Wright 
Guerin 
Atkinson 








4 
4, 


Owners--1, W. S. Jacobs Mortimer ¢ 


6, Maxwell Howard 


20ld 





won easily: place driving 


Heels or Brilliant—Whimsical Mis 


1:144, 


wt 4 
121 
113 
111 
109 
113 
111 
111 
118 
Is Blind 108 9 
Daily double (Fire High and Crazy 
Scratched—Surf. Sgptch Irish 
Owners—1, Mrs. Erma Canning 


Starters 


a ha 
4 


as 
hd 
6? 
52 
7 
na 
314 


Turf R 


Ambassador 


ee 
Hr W301 Om Wr 


sy 


9 
é 


J 


SECOND RACE—Purse $2,500; claiming price $3,500-$3.000: for 3-year-olds; six furlongs 
Start good 
Flying 


Went 
by Supremus 


1 


2 Lr 


to 


Horse) 
Raw Recruit 
Amiel 

I. Bieber: 6. A. M Bank: 7, Emanuel Giuffra; 8, E. Brady: 9, Isabelle D’Andrew 


J 


3, E. KE. Lipitz; 4, Barrington Stable; 5, Grant 





2:15 


off 2:16 
Trainer, 


Winner, ch 
W. R. Fairbank 


by 


to post * 
Time— 


Mutuels— Dollar 


St P) Sh. Odds 


7.40 4.00 3.50 2.70 
4.10 4.00 3.20 
9.00 28.60 
6.40 

8.70 

152.7 

86.05 

. 2.20 

145.45 


Fin 


14 


Str Jockeys 
Permane 
Atkinson 
Merritt 

Pittarelli 


Wright . 
Smith.. 





G. L 
Thacker 
Guerin 
Gerlock 


paid $22.10 
Hercules 
3, M. Mac Schwebe! Jean Rich; 


4. Mrs 





THIRD RACE—Purse $3,000: for maide 
eenth Start good won driving 


f. 3, by Blue Larkspur-Lady Charlo 


Time—1: 48 4-5 


Starters Wt. P.P.St lw 


place 


ns 
Sa 
tte 


AJ 


3-year-olds and 


one mile and a six- 
off 2:45%. Winner, 
Trainer—John MHazza. 


upward 
2:45 


Ill 


me 
by 


Went to post 
Sir Gallahad 


Mutuels Dollar 


Str. Fin Jockeys St Pi Sh. Odds 





2 11% 
6 
gba 
41 
Qhd 
58 


111 2 
- lll 1 
5 
farfarm 3 
4 
6 
Overweight—Trial, 2 
Owners—1, John Hazza;: 
6, Max Panzner 


Trainer 


Date. by Hourless 


4 


P.P 


aA 


wt 
113 
113 
119 
113 
110 
113 
108 
113 


Starters 


2y 
4na- 
Tha 
61, 
52 

® 

32 


fiel 


ean Sickle 


BAW wo 
DOP HM ATW 


Overweight—Timore 2 
Owners—1 
Paragon Stable; 6, Allen T. Simmons 

FIFTH RACE—The Daingerfield 
ard; 2 miles and a sixteenth 
Winner, br. g., 
falues to winner, $6,775 
record 


second, $2,000; t 


Starters Wt. PP. St 
107 5 

126 
113 
104 
117 
104 
113 
100 


aribou 

Sammy Angott 
Rhyme 
Eye for Eve 


6 


Overweight—Baruna, 
Owners—1, Mrs. C. E. Coates 
idal: 5, Havahome Stable; 6, 


9 


P. A. B 


RT 
—————————————_——_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_——___—_—_——————rrrr 
Handicap 


SIXTH RACE—The Verplanck 

six furlongs. Start good: won e 

br. g. 3. by Swashbuckler-Wing 
Time—1:11 1-5 


yy 
11% 
53 
6 
92 
41 
31 


wt 


0” Gold 
odeler 

Sun 

Pearl 
Scfatched—Swimmin 
Owners—1, Jule Fink 


Hole 


9 
2 


G 


There were 4,426 winning tickets} Bachrach: 6. Jose Coll Vidal 


on the daily double combination of| 
Fire High and Crazy Ho 
return of $22.10. The pool reached | 
$108,698. 


John C. Clark was 


a 


leah Park in Florida. Crazy Horse, | 
winner of the second, formerly car- | 
ried Mr. Clark's colors. The Hia-| 
leah president reports that Flor- 
ida appears to be in for a banner | 
winter season. 


| 


Devil Diver, with 
has been placed at the top of the 


126 pounds, | 


weights for the $30,000 Westches- |Stella Sun 


R 
ter Handicap to be run Saturday. |p 


First Fiddle and Seven Hearts are 


Winner 


| Rath Ronan 


rei | Sir Alfred 
ViSItOr | Green 


after a quick business trip to Hia-| Rarified 
Blue 
War 


Mrs 


| Lass 
| High Rose, a-Orgullosa and Pentagon Lady also 
ran 


| SECOND 


Miss R 


SEVENTH RACE—Purse $3,000; 


Starters Wt. P.P.St 


, A. Crouch; 


Te 
purse $3,500 


11 
6 
21, 
4g 
31. 
52 


3, 


80 3.00 3.05 
50 


11% 1” Atkinson 
2% 2 Gerlock . 
Thacker . 
Eccard 
Guerin 
Pittarelli 


8.10 3 
2 2 wee 6 
ghd 
ghd : 


3% 


4, Mrs. S. Boland; 5, Mrs. 


Phantom Farm 





Maine Chance Farm; 2, George D. Widener 


J 


Handicap: purse $10,000 added: 
Start good 
5, by Annapolis—Lost Agnes, 


hird 


Tom Smith 


six furlongs 
f., 2, by War 


for fillies, 
off 3:16 
Time—1:11 


years old 
Winner, br 
2.5 


2- 


3:15, 


-—~—Mutuels—, Dollar 
St Pl Sh. Odds 


3.30 3.00 70 «£65 
ee 6.00 20 11.30 
° 70 13.45 
4.35 
9.30 
19.45 
78.20 
40.95 


Fin 
15 
4 
36 
41 
52 

at 

72 

g 


Jockeys 


Atkinson 
Wright 

Guerin ee 
Permane ,...+. 
Snider 

Meade 

Roberts 
Mehrtens 


4.20 1 
4.70 1 


3, E. Brady: 4, Wheatley Stable; 

ule Fink; 8, Columbus O'Donnell 

for 3-year-olds and up- 
Went to post 3:45, 
Trainer, E. Coates 

Time—3:34 2/5 (new 


won driving: place easily. 
by Out the Way 


$1,000, fourth, $500. 


-——Mutuels—, Dollar 


Jockeys St Pl. Sh. Odds 


Wahler -. 42.00 15.60 4.10 20.00 

Atkinson 5.30 2.90 2.85 | 
Keiper 2.30 1.30 
Permane eve 8.80 
D. Meade ... 1.30 
Mehrtens 19.80 
Wright 4.05 
Merritt 33.70 | 





Brookmea de 


Wid 


asily 
s of 


La Faivre 


claiming price $5,000 


7 mile and a furlong. Start good: won driving 
rse with a b. g.. 4, by Belfonds—Ridge Blond, by Durbar II 


| 
| 
| 


Moon Maiden 
Stable: 3. Neil 
2d: 7, Mrs. Philip Bieber 


4 


G. Gibbons: 4, Jose Coll 


ener 8, D. Bentha 

$3,000 added; for 3-year-olds and up- 
Went to post 4:18, off 4:19 
Stornoway. Trainer—W. C. 


purse 
place driving 
the Wind, by 


-—Mutuels—, Dollar 
St. Pl Sh. Odds 


5.10 3.70 2.70 1.55 
° 9.10 4.50 11.25 
~-+- 2.900 2.75 

° 4.35 

- 8.15 

- 10.75 


Str 
15 
ond 
514 
31° 
41 
6 


Fin 
14 
91 
31 
48 
54 
6 


Jockeys 


D. Meade.. 
Roberts 
Permane ..... 
Merritt 
Guerin 
Atkinson 


3, Belair Stud; 4, J. J. Schwebel; 5, J. 


for 4-year-olds and upward: one 

Went to post 4:50, off 4:50%,. 
Trainer, S. Rutchik. Time—1-:52 
—Mutuels—, Dollar 
St Pl Sh. Odds 


place easily 


Str. Fin Jockeys. 





.-114 : 
114 
108 
108 
120 
106 


Apples 


Nose 
5 7] 


Master 


jnk 

28 

3% 

44 

53 
6 


Atkinson 
Wright 
Permane 
Roberts 
Thacker 
Pittarelli 


. 10.30 4.00 280 4.15 
‘ 3.10 2.30 1.75 
2.50 2.60 
15.85 

4.15 

36.25 





Overweight—War Master. 
Ownera—1, Havahome Stable 
Jean Rich J. M. Seider 


2 
6 


Mrs 
Ww 


Lost Stream. a-Led Astray, Miss F 


H. Watters entry 
$1,500 claiming 
six furlongs (cht 
(Kirk) 14.30 9.10 
Gonzales 
(Bowers 
Biue String Royal 
Cackle Time, Primarily 


a-J. J. Fobley and J 
RACE—Purse 
year-olds and upward 
116 
Fleet, 116 
Queen 
15 3-5 
Mend, 


oyal 
andles 
Time— 


111 
ili 
1 
i 


in the same notch with 124 each, | audrey ‘M and Unheard also ran 
Daily Double—( Road Scraper and Stella Sun 


according to Jack Campbell's 
weights issued yesterday At a 
mile and _  three-sixteenths, the 
event is the big feature of the 


Empire City final day. 


T 


I 
M 


Ss 


Sea 


|B 


al 


Jamaica Entries 


FIRST RACE—Purse $2,000: claiming 
olds and upward: six furlongs 
To Town James 1107|Third Rail 
aNote 111/ Royal Weista 
Darby Drucele 105 Busy Madeline . 
Dot Gee Kay "100! aElcinap eee 
Alatomo 115 | Deimos 
~- 


Reformatory 
rd and W. 
entry ip 


aMrs 

SECOND RACE—Purse $3,000; allowances; 2- |G 
year-olds; six furlongs G 
Febridee 114} Fri 
Steel Chain Mc 


Caboure 114 
THIRD RACE—Purse 

year-olds: six furlongs 

Ace Skipper 114;Star Batter 

Big Party 114|}Good Ground 

Ball Shot 114! Thor 

FOURTH RACE—Purse $3,000; claiming 
year-olds: one mile and a sixteenth 
Hatranette 108 |aWings 
Houlgate 7106|Staze Bond 
Reason 120/Up Front : 
Mist .-110|Genial Sam S 
aLloyd’s 117'Epicure = 

aMill River Stable entry 

FIFTH RACE—The New Rochelle Handicap: 
purse $10,000 added: ail ages; six furlongs 
Miss Drummond 108|Harvard Sauare 112 
Brownie 121\ Ariel Lad .--123 
Jean Miracle .108| Jack 8. L ocoeknt 
Breezing Home 169! 

SIXTH RACE—The 
purse $3,500 added 
olds and upward; one 
Bold Dan 109;Swimmin Hole 
Coat of Arms ..122|Free Dutch o- 
Quiz 104/Light of Morn 
Gambling Andy 

SEVENTH RACE— 
purse $3,500 added 

s and upward 
Union 
Noview 


3-year 


111/D 
111/H 
108 
111 
111} ¢ 
i. 
s 


122 
Crawt Jacobs 


109 
114/\E 
109 }G 


* 


ry Teddy 
1107 ntaineer 
Copper Bo 

$3,000; allowances 


109 
114 | 
114] 

iB 


H 


115 
115} 
113} 
7104 | 
eee 


A 


Vv 


Oscawanna Handicap: 
(first division 3-year- 
mile and a sixteenth 
113) 
112 
119/a 


|E 


iC 


102 
The Oscawanna Handicap; 
(second division): .3-year- 
one mile and a sixteenth 
112/ Victim 112) 
117/Fire Sticky 108 
Le Havre 115| Peace Fleet ..113 
Flaught 119 
“Five pounds apprentice allowance claimed 
TSeven pounds claimed 


Lineal Park Results 


LAUREL, MD 
By The Associated Press 


FIRST RACE—Purse $1,500: claiming 
olds and upward; six furlongs 

Road Scraper. 113 .. (Skiete 

Gellant Mowlee, (Bowers 

War Agent, 118 Root 
Time—1:14 1-15, Ginomel, 


| 





|P 
\F 


3-year- | P 


3.60 


113 32.80\R 


Bell Soma, True) P 


paid 


| Fe JURTH 


Prepossessing 


Manadru, 


SEVENTH 


Astral, 115 


| King Neptune 
}Down Six 
|Macks Dream 
| Hy-Gay 

| Dark Mischief 


2.40 | year-olds 


400| Her Image 


$71.70 
HIRD RACE—Purse 
olds and upward 

teenths 

Nap 

Sun 
lll 


claiming; 4-y 
and three 


$2,000 
ye mile 
3.90 3.10 
10.40 


Jemas 
Fiocchi 
Meade 
Balloter Waugh Pop 
Power House, On the I 
Jerome and Careless Kn 


116 
ill 
R 


ist 
ichigan 
well ime 
Time—2: 06 
Tantrum 

argain Boy, Sir 
so ran 
$2,000 allowances 
«chute 

2.90 


RACE—Purse 
year-olds six furlongs 
irector 113 (Bowers 
and Wave (Scawthorn 
115 (Clark 
Time—1:15 3-5. Whetstone, Linnie Bee 
el, Margus and Chance Ace also ran 
IFTH RACE—Purse $2,500; claiming 
olds and upward 
atron Saint 111 
ino T., 116 
uerrilla, 118 
Time—1: 47 4-5 Rare, Gay Boo, Sal! 
rin, Lee's Jimmie, Peace Maker Wicke 
al, Myrtle M., Gun Bearer and Ashame 


2.50 


112 8.10 


5.60 
5.30 


(Snellings 7.90 
(Kirkland) 


(Bletzacker) 


$7,500 added 2-year-olds one 
sixteenth 

113 (Kirkland 

(Scawthorn 
ritish Buddy, 113 (Breen 
Time—1: 48 3-5 Chicle Clown also 
RACE—Purse $2500 
3-year-olds; one mile and seventy yar 
rt Brown, 115 (R. Meade) 15.80 6.70 
lue Wings, 114 (Gonzales) 5.90 
lucky Raider (Breen) 
Time—1: 47 4-5 Surrogate 
aldina Brave and Mercy 


purse 
and 
indu 


a 
Kush 
113 


4.10 
6.40 


6.50 


117 


Salvo Angel 


year-olds and upward; 
sixteenths 
asy Chance, 


lansman, 106 6.00 


(Borsell) 
; (R. Meade) 
Time—2: 02 Nita Jean, Sun Dial 
lso ran 
Track fast 


Rockingham Park Entries 
SALEM, N. H. 
By The Associated Press 


FIRST RACE—Purse $1,500 claiming 


| year-olds and upward; six furlongs (chute 


108 Last Frontier 

Gold Paid 

Mae Line 

Idle Fancies 

Bright and Early 

Lightfoot Lee 

River Shannon 

Amour 
claiming 


acific Maid 
atal Hour 111 
*106 
111 
114 
111 
114 
aul Scariet 111 | Parfait 
SECOND RACE—Purse $1.500 
six furlongs (chute) 
114|Pipeliner 

111 |Sun Over ....ecce 
111 ‘Hello Bill 


ita Jane 


MGR cccccveccoese 


4-y 
one mile and seventy yards 


Ethel 
Pond 


SSS SS SSSR? 


9 
ite 
5.30 


60.50 18.50 


3.60 


Nora 
Shaille 


ear 
six 


2 40 
8 30 
4.00 


North 


ne 


ight 


2.00 

5.30 

4.10 
Tin 


ear- 


4.10 
3.30 


12.00 
’ 


of 
liffe 


also 


ran 
|SIXTH RACE—The Spalding Lowe Jenkins 


mile 


out 
out 
out 


ran 
allowances; 


ds 
4.30 
3.50 
4.10 


Cattachiptico, 


also 


ran 
EIGHTH RACE—Purse $3,000; allowances$: 3-| 
one mile and three-/| 


106. .(Snellings) 16.80 840 5 30|Eddie Walker, yesterday were in- 


4.60 
3.70 


Chalie-| York State Athletic Commission. 
donna, Top Reward, Found Out and Blue Sash The 


D. Jacobs; 3, Miss Constance Morabito: 4, 


108|Tacaro Pilate . 
*109 Rock Time | 
"104 | Renraw 
Maximont 114 Lady Boswell 
|Linwood Linnie *103' Neat Kee 
THIRD RACE—Purse $1,500; maidens 
weights; 2-year-olds; six furlongs (chute 
aSwag 115|Star Blenheim 
Relheub Sis 115|Karen Q 
Flare Belle 115 Hex 
aWill Markham 118 Bobsis 
Green Log 118 Star Willow 
aM. Siravo entry 
FOURTH RACE 
year-olds and upward 


Valdina Greedy 
Bomb Berlin 
Lem's Baby 





special | 
115 | 
115 
118 
115 
*110 


Purse $1,600: claiming: 3-| 
six furlongs (chute) j 
Boy Larkmead 111! Warrawee 104 
Heel Up 108 Torch Lee 120 
inch Date 104; Rose Mountain 120 
Legend 104| Madigama lll 
‘ Up ‘ 111 
FIFTH RACE—Purse $1,500 
olds and upward: one mile and a 
Garden Pot 111 |Conowingo 
Hy Rickey 106 | Rebbina 
ryrone 117 | Jascart 
Ben Gray 114) Revive 
Evzone 105 
SIXTH RACE—Purse $2,000 allowances: 3- | 
year-olds and upward; one mile and a six- | 
teenth 
| Night Bomber 111)| Peter Boone ‘ 115 | 
Cab Sir *112 Alport . 115 | 
In Vogue *107 | Canee . 108 | 
Dog Trot 112' Smoothy 110} 
SEVENTH RACE—Purse $2,000: claiming; 3- | 
year-olds and upward; one mile and a six- 
teenth 
Thalel 
Mono Miller 
Due Sport 
Hopeful Reward \ 
Tom Toddy 11 
EIGHTH RACE—Purse 
year-olds and upward 
teenth 
Defense Bond 
Snowline 
Cabin Gal 
Texalite 
Syrian Boy 111 
| Rest Awhile 111 


| *Apprentice allowance 


L 
Higt 
Lit 
claiming: 3-year- 
sixteenth 
*112 
108 | 
112) 


*106 | 


7 114] 
111 | 
111 


108 


3- 
six- 


117 | Glastauder 
111|\Cake Gravy 
111 | Jelwell 

108 Discouraged | 
1 

$1,800 

one mile 


claiming 
and a 


| 


117 114 
114 
108 
108 


Border's Boy 
Tole Free 
Picanny 
Sparker 

Edie Jane 
Pretty Is 
claimed 


| 


Wright and Pilot Suspended 
Chalky Wright and his manager, 





\definitely suspended by the New 


reason advanced was that 
|Wright had failed to go through 
jwith a bout against Pittsburgh 
| Jackie Wilson, scheduled for Wash- 
ington recently. 


Bissonette Braves’ Coach 
BOSTON, Oct. 31 (®—Tom 
Sheehan resigned today as Boston 
Braves coach and De! Bissonette 
\o. Winthrop, Me., manager of the 
|Hartford club in the Eastern 
| League, was signed immediately to| 


| 
| 


| Bit Gay 


IN. Y¥., won an 
}decision tonight from Dom Amo- 
at the 
Westchester County center. Amo- 
roso Was down for a nine count in 
the third. Phil Palmer, 141, Van- 


FIELD HANDICAP YE 


'589 Minor 


BASEBALL'S DRAFT 
LISTED FOR TODAY 


League Players 
Eligible for Draw—Phils 
Get First Choice 





CHICAGO, Oct. 31 (Pi Base-| 
'ball’s chief bargain hunters—the) 


major league club owners—will 


'|huddle here tomorrow in their an-| 


“ |picking up another Grover Cleve- 


Si 


Associated Press 


ONLY TWO RIVALS 
FOR TWILIGHT TEA 


Calumet Star in $25,000 
Pimlico Special Today 


BALTIMORE, — It 


Oct. 31 (® 


will be youth versus experience, or 


Twilight Tear against Devil Diver, 
in tomorrow's $25,000 
special at a mile and 
sixteenths. 

For those who don't 
odds, there will be 


three- 


like short 


qualifying race, at Laurel 


Saturday. 


As the three were entered for 
the weight-for-age classic which 


will feature the opening card at 


Pimlico, no rider had been assigned 


for the Tear. 
Arcaro to Ride Devil Diver 


Trainer John M. Gaver chose 
Eddie Arcaro to ride Devil Diver, 
5-year-old from the Greentree 
Stable of the late Mrs. Payne 
Whitney. Ken Scawthorn, until 
recently an apprentice, was as- 
signed to Megogo, owned by the 
Christiana Stables of Mr. and Mrs. 
H. L. Lunger of Wilmington, Del. 

But Ben A. Jones of Warren 
Wright’s Calumet Farm delayed 
naming a jockey for the Tear. 
Doug Dodson has piloted her in 
her last two starts, including the 
Maryland Handicap, in which she 
was fourth. 

All three candidates were on the 
track this morning for final work- 
outs. Megogo and Twilight Tear 
only jogged, but Devil Diver 
worked a mile from the gate in 
company of a stablemate. Arcaro 
said the Diver was “full of run.” 


Megogo to Be Outsider 


The Calumet filly was an early 
public choice to add the winner- 


| take-all purse to her winnings of 


$177,165. Indications were that she 
and Devil Diver would be the 
choices, probably at almost the 
same price, with Megogo at 10—1 
or better by post-time. 

Devil Diver will carry 126 
pounds, Megogo 120, the Tear 117. 
The meeting tomorrow, under joint 
sponsorship of the State’s four 
major tracks, will run through 
Nov. 25. 

The entries: 


FIRST RACE—Purse $2,000 claiming 4- 
year-olds and upward; one mile and a furlong 
War Shy . 113;Misty Lady 
Top Sergeant ..122/Alfhangrier . 
Omada o+eeeeessh13/Saros 
Agrarist oescesesdld| Anzac : 
Yiee Bar 116/ Residue eee 
Cash o’ Boy.......*111| Winged Phariah... 
Golden Mowlee 6 | Single 
Alca Gal.. 4 
SECOND RACE—Purse $1,700: maidens, spe 
cial weights, 2-year-olds; one mile and sevent 
yards 
Colonel John 
Black Knight ..... 
Jetsam Sonenees 
Proud Pappy........118 
Saving eececevesse 
Tragedienne .......*110 
Gold Beach 118' Gay Larkmead 
aSir Jinx 118 Eva's Memory 
aHerkley and Moore entry 
THIRD RACE—Purse $2,500 
year-olds and upward: about two 
War Battle ), Beneksar 
Floating Isle Spurious Count 
Kennebunk Rover Boy 
High Tint Nordmeer 
Refugio 
FOURTH 
year-olds 
Brides Biscuit 
Hammer-Lock . 
aGold Boy 


. 116 


"113 
116 
ook 
*11 


3;Display Flight.. 
Omashane 
aBright Mantaka 
Pine Lake 
Temeru 
Ponamau 


115 
115 
- 15 


--*110 
113 


. 113 
steeplechase; 3- 
miles 
13, 
13 
153 
7 
"146 
RACE-—Purse $2,500 
six furlongs (chute) 
108 | Piquant 
115/aBeau's Nurse 
*117/| Sheltie 
112/ Flight Nurse 
*108' Wayne County ... 
*109| Patty Knot 
108/ John Q. Public 
115 


1M 


claiming; 


. Li 


Gallantly 
Erato 
Country Lad 
Mister Chat 
aConnor and North entry 
FIFTH RACE—Grayson 
$10,000 added: 3-year-olds 
mile and a half 
Astral 
Lord Calvert 


Handicap 
and upward 


116; Aera { 


122}Moon Maiden 
Bell-the-Cat 110' High Command 
Harford 116'Hi Neightb« 
SIXTH RACE—Purse $3,000: allowances 
year-olds and upward, six furlongs ‘chute 
Flying Tartar *105| Wise Advice . 
Spare Man 116| Sophocles 
Hasteville 116 New Moon 
Horn Beam 109 
SEVENTH RACE—The 
$25,000 (winner take all 
and three-sixteenths 
Megogo 
Twilight Tear 
EIGHTH RACE 
year-olds and upward 
teenth 
Wise Timmie 
Saboteur 


l 
1 
] 
1 
i 


Pimlico Special! 
all ages one 


purse 


120, Devil Diver 12 
117 
-Purse $2,500 


one mile 


4 


allowances 


*113; Tamil 
*117|/He Rolls 
Relious "113 Be Brief 
aTake Courage 115/aCal's Pet 
aBomar Stable entry 
“Apprentice allowance claimed 


Southern Drops Split Season 


ATLANTA, Oct. 31 
the Southern Association “is 
trenched and can survive 


rectors today 


offs. The Shaughnessy 


Billy Evans said. 
sure then whether 
henee 


’ 


ident 
weren't 
league would survive, 
adopted the split season,’ 
added. 


Rotolo ‘Defeats Amoroso 


WHITE PLAINS, N. Y., Oct. 31 


(®)—Tommy Rotolo, 138%, Rome 


easy 
13532, City, 


roso, Jersey 


couver, B. C., and Vince La Salva 
146, Mount Vernon, N. Y., boxe 
to a draw 





replace him, the Braves announced 
today. 


semi-final. 


Pimlico 


Megogo, who 
won the Washington Handicap, a 
last 


13) 
-“111) 


. 115 
115 
144 
140 
144 


110} 


purse of 4 ,000. 


one 


; 


mile 


in 


and a &six- 


(/P)—Ex- 
pressing complete confidence that 
en- 
under 
war-wrought problems,” league di- 
voted a return to 
ithe Shaughnessy system of play- 
series, 
followed for eight years, was re- 
placed in 1943 by the split season, 
“strictly as a war measure,” Pres- 
“We 
the 
we 
Evans | 


eight-round| 


nual draft meeting in the hope of | 
‘land Alexander or another Hack! 
| Wilson at low prices. | 
| The session will be held in the! 
|offices of Kenesaw Mountain Lan- 
|dis, commissioner of baseball, with 
Secretary Leslie O’Connor presid- 
ing in the absence of Landis, who 
has been hospitalized for the past 
| month. 

Service Men Included 


This year 589 minor leaguers 
will be eligible for the draft, with 
|the three Double-A leagues— 
American Association, Interna- 
{tional and Pacific Coast—furnish- 
ing 340 active players for the 
draft price of $7,500. Hundreds of 
others from lesser leagues, as well 
jas the “rights” to retired players 
}and service men, also are included. 

Clubs may make one selection 
jeach in inverse order of their fin- 
}ish in their league races, with the 
National League eighth-place team 
having the call over the cellar 
American League team in even- 
|numbered years. Thus the Phillies} 
|tomorrow will have first pick and) 
| Washington second. 
| Although the roll-call is repeat- 
jed until all clubs have as many 
|picks as they desire, limited only 
| by the 40-player squad maximums, 
the draft has averaged only four- 
teen men annually. In 1942, how- 
ever, it hit twenty-three, while the 
other extreme was reached in 
/1932 when only four minor league 
|players were taken. Last year 
\sixteen were selected. 


Wilson Chief Draft Prize 


Hack Wilson, picked by the Cubs 
ifrom Toledo in 1925, and who be- 
leame the National League's all- 
|time home-run king in 1930, is gen- 
erally regarded as the chief draft 
iprize of modern times. 

Landis, the 77-year-old commis- 
sioner of baseball, will be released 
from the hospital before Nov. 7, 
{O'Connor said, because Landis in- 
tends to vote in the coming Presi- 
|dential election. Landis entered 
the hospital before the world’s se- 
ries for a physical check-up and 
treatment of a severe cold. He 
has been sitting up for the past 
week and his spirit is described as 
being “fine.” 


BASEBALL RAISED $329,555 
War Fund and Red Cross Aided 
by 16 Major League Games 


CHICAGO, Oct. 31 (#)—The Na- 
tional War Fund, Inc., and the 
American Red Cross today bene- 
fited from last summer’s major 
‘league war relief baseball games 
| by a total of $329,555.46, the office 
|of Commissioner K. M. Landis an- 
nounced. ~ 

A check for $164,777.74 was pre- 
|sented to the National War Fund, 
while the check to the Red Cross 
was only one cent less. The six- 
teen games were sponsored by War 
Relief and Service Fund, Inc., and 
even players, umpires and club 
presidents had to pay to see the 
contests. 

The New York Yankees turned 
over the biggest individual ‘‘gate”’ 
to the two organizations—$34,- 
|587.13. Detroit was second in the 
|American League with $33,287.78, 
|and other clubs turned in: Chicago, 
$32,563.96; Cleveland, $30,684.72; 
St. Louis, $24,393. 81; Boston, $22,- 
|529.70; Washington, $17,374.05, and| 
Philadelphia, $10,319.22,:for an 
| American League total of $205,- 
740.37. 

The National League raised 
| $122,270.24 for the fund, with St. 
Louis the leader with $25,832.55. 

















| 
| 
| 


} 


| 





116 Other clubs followed in this order: 
‘ 6 





|Pittsburgh, $23,007.62; Chicago, 
$15,887.99 plus a one-dollar dona- 
| tion “from a patron”; Philadelphia, 
| $15,678.01; New York, $12,924.40; 
|Cincinnati, $12,910.65; Brooklyn, 
| $11,820.44, and Boston, $4,207.58. 

| In addition, the Southern Asso- 
| ciation donated $1,544.86 raised in 
a game played in that league. 


‘BRYANT OUTPOINTS TERRY 


| 
Gains Decision in 8-Round Main 
Bout at Broadway Arena 


9.) 


Marvin 
| Tex., 


Bryant, 160%, Dallas, 
won a unanimous decision 


-.-1l7} . : — 

*“y08 | from Frankie Terry, 15744, Brook- 
112 

.."109) * 


“u3;/event at the Broadway Arena in 


|lyn, in the feature eight-round 


Brooklyn last night before a crowd | 
} 

Terry cut Bryant’s right eye in| 
the third and his left eye in the! 
|fifth stanza with overhand rights, 
but Bryant came back strongly, | 
flooring his opponent with a hard 
left and right cross to the jaw for 
‘}a no-count. 

Joe Torrens, 144%, Puerto Rico, 
jand Julio Gallucci, 147%, Hart- 
ford, Conn., fought to a draw in 
the eight-round semi-final, It was 
a slugfest all the way. 

Benny Cartegena, 140, West 
Side, triumphed on a _ technical | 
| Basement at the end of the third 
}round when Herbert Solomon, 134, 
|the Bronx, was unable to come out 
‘for the fourth because of a badly 


) 
J 


| 


Sports of the Cimes 


Reg. U. 8S. Pat. vf. 


By ARTHUR DALEY 


They're Off and Running at Pimlico 


OMPARED to the Kentucky Derby, 
Preakness and other ancient classics of the 

turf, today’s Pimlico Special is strictly a 
johnny-come-lately to the thoroughbred sport. 
But lack of a respectable old age cannot diminish 
In eight brief years it has grown 


its importance. 
to be recognized as one of the 


campaign, an equine world series, so to speak. 
Young Alfred Gwynne Vanderbilt devised it to 

decide ,the championship of each season and the 

conditions he set down for it make the test the 


most sporting race of them all. 
twenty-four outstanding stakes 


the off they tore on a wild journey. Speed laws were 
broke:. and a few bothersome red lights ignored. 
But he caught Riddle in time and signed him up 
for the race on the edge of the information desk 
The turf world was agog at the news. On Pim- 
lico Day a record crowd of 40,000 jammed the 
stands, electric with excitement. This was t 
the race of races and War Admiral was desti: 
to become the greatest horse in the } 
the American turf, greater even than t 
Man o’ War—or so they thought. They backe: 
the son of Big Red at odds of 1 to 4 


The Start 


top races of the 


us 
h 


i a 


s 


He first chose 
with their win- 


ners becoming automatically eligible for the Pim- 


lico Special. 


there are no entry fees. The 


$25,000 jackpot because it’s run on a winner-take- 


all basis. 


Devil Diver, the leading handicap horse, will 
square off today against Twilight Tear, cham- 
If the Tear can polish off 


pion 3-year-old filly. 
the Diver, she undoubtedly will 


the best of her age, regardless of sex, while the 


Greentree 5-year-old can use the 


board to general recognition as this season's king 


of the turf. 
There probably will be only th 
Megogo rounding out the field 


never has had more than four and that only 


twice. Once it even was the 
away’s famous walkover whe 


jogged casually around the oval to win $10,000 
without even raising a large bead of perspiration. 


Match Race 


However, the race which m 


Special the standout it has since become was 
the 1938 affair, a match between War Admiral, 
the Triple Champion of the season before, and 
Seabiscuit, the horse who has been described as 
the one who was “late for dinner but he dined 
These two were having tremendous cam- 


well.” 
paigns. The son of Man o’ Wa 
of nine tests in the East while 


traveled all over the country, adding to his rich 


earnings by being in the money 
starts. A race between them v 


naturals and Vanderbilt determined to match 


them. 
First he sounded out Charlie 


of the Biscuit, and found him agreeable. 


he tried Sam Riddle, owner of t 


asked for three concessions: George Cassidy as 


starter, a walk-up start and a t 
pounds instead of 126. 
whisked across town to offer th 
ard and was pleasantly surpri 
accepting them. 


Back he rushed to Riddle’s hotel, only to dis- 
cover that his man was en route to a Philadel- 
Vanderbilt commandeered a 


cab, volunteered to pay any and all fines, and 


phia-bound train. 


GOLF STARS TO MAKE 


RICHEST WINTER TOUR 


Golfdom’'s richest winter cual 


the P. G. A. sponsored 1944-45 
swing from Oregon down the West 
Coast, through the Southwest and 
South into the Carolinas, will find 
the play-for-pay brigade compet- 
ing for more than $150,000 in war 


bonds. 
Fred J. Corcoran, tournament 


manager for the Professional Golf- 
ers Association, announced yester- 
day through The Associated Press 
that the tour would get under way 
Nov. 23-26 with a $10,000 event at 
Portland, Ore., followed by eleven 
other definitely scheduled fixtures, 
four tentative tournaments and 
several “possibilities.” 

“This will be the largest winter| 
tour in the history of the associa-| 
tion,” Corcoran said. “All the 
events will be played for the bene- 
fit of various war relief funds and 
all the top players will assist at 
various camps, clubs and hospitals 
in golf clinics.” 

Byron Nélson of Toledo, golf's 
leading bond winner with $39,600 
for 1944, will play at Portland, as 
will Sam Snead, recently released 
after twenty-five months in the 
Navy. Harold (Jug) McSpaden, 
second money-winning star with 
$26,000; Craig Wood, duration na- 
tional open champion; Bob Hamil- 
ton, P. G. A. king; Sam Byrd, 
Toney Penna, Jimmy Hines, Willie 
Goggin and Ed Dudley are among 
other stars making the winter cir- 
cuit. 

Definitely scheduled events, with 
the cash value, are: 


Nov. 23-26, Portland, Ore., $10,000. 

Dec, 1-4, San Francisco, $10,000; 7-10. Oak- 
land, Calif., $5,600; 7-10, Miami, Fla., $10,000; 
15-17, Richmond, Calif., $5,600. 

Jan, 5-8, Los Angeles, $10,000; 12-14, Phoenix, 
Ariz., $5,000; 19-21, El Paso, Tex., $5,000; 
26-28, San Antonio, Tex., $5,000 

March 16-19, Charlotte, N. C., $10,000; 22-25 
Greensboro, N. C., $5,000; 30-April 1, Durham, 


N. C., $5,000 ’ 
Tentative tournaments include: 


Dec, 29-31, Bing Crosby open, Hollywood 
Feb. 9-11, New Orleans; 16-18, Gulfport, 
Miss.; 23-25, Pensacola, Fla 


The Dec. 22-24, Feb. 1-4 and 
March 1-4 dates have been held 
open for “possible” tournaments. 


FIORE MISSES N. Y. U. DRILL 


Dinsmore Also Out Because of 
Injuries—Weinstein at End 





The New York University foot- 
ball team went through a two-hour 
session yesterday on Ohio Field, 
but two regulars were missing as 
a result of injuries sustained in the 
City College game last Saturday. 
Al Fiore, right halfback, came out 
of the fray with an injured knee 


and he spent the afternoon having 
it treated. Ronald Dinsmore, right 
end, bruised his shoulder, and also 
took the day off. 





swollen left eye. The contest was 
scheduled for six rounds. 


114744, East Side, knocked out 
Freddie James, 147%, Montclair, 
|N. J., in 1:41 of the sixth. Sal 
| Scilabra, 124%, New York, defeat- 
ed Lou Prince, 128, Princeton, 
N. J., in the four-round opener. 


Dizzy Dean No. 1 Announcer 

ST. LOUIS, Oct. 31 (®i—Jerome 
Herman (Dizzy) Dean, former 
pitching star of the St. Louis 
Cardinals and later with the Chi- 
cago Cubs, was selected today as 
the nation’s No. 1 play-by-play 
baseball announcer for 1944 by The 
Sporting News, national sports 
weekly. Harry Wismer of the Blue 
Network was designated by the 


| 





j|commentator. He won a similar 
|designation in 1943. Dean broad- 
cast the home games of the St. 
| Louis Cardinals and Browns for a 
'|two-State network of stations. 


in the eight-round) AMERICAN HOCKEY LEAGUE 


' St. Louis 3, Pittsburgh 2. 


|paper as the outstanding sports| 


Bernard Simon, who has been 


In another six rounder, Sid Silas, |@!ternating with Frank Sukana at|rourrH Race—Purse $1,200 


right guard, was in uniform, but 
he did not take part in any heavy 
work, because of a strained back. 
None of the injuries is serious, and 
Coach Jack Weinheimer expects to 
have all three players ready for 
the contest with Bucknell on Sat- 
urday in Lewisburg, Pa 

Weinheimer decided that it wouid 
be best to hold off the contact 
work for another day, so he sent 
the squad through a signa! drill, 
and later had the men work on 
some new plays. Tom Berone 
handled the right halfback post 
and Larry Weinstein was at right 
end. / 


Bruins Get Jennings in Trade 
DETROIT, Oct. 31 (4)—The Red 
| Wings, of the National Hockey 
League, have traded Forward Bill 
Jennings to the Bruins for Right 
Wing Peter Paul Leswick and an 
unannounced sum of cash. Leswick 
has been directed “to report to In- 
dianapolis, the Wings’ farm club. 


Entry is by invitation only and 


The youthful promoter 


4s 


There was no outburst from the crowd 
only two entries walked to the post. The 
tators were too tense, the type of tenseness that 
grips the throat. There was one false 
There was another one. Then a thunderou 
echoed over the Maryland hills. “They’ 

They broke evenly. Then, while a 
crowd watched, the Biscuit forged to a 
length lead. The ugly duckling from thr’ West 
who had never found himself until he had reached 
the age of 4, burst out in front, increased his 
margin to two lengths at the quarter—and on 
came the Admiral. 

They called him “The Little ’Un.” 
little one sent the railbirds into ecstacies c 
light as he closed the gap until only a head sep- 
arated them at the half. The Biscuit sho ave 
cracked then. But he didn’t. He held 
head margin as they flashed past the three-quar 
ters and past the mile. Pandemonium r 
in the stands as they swung into the final 
sixteenths. 

Georgie Wolff on Seabiscuit turned 
Charlie Kurtsinger on War Admiral) 
moved. Maybe he said, “Good-by If 
say it, he should have been polite enough tc 
so because the son of Hard Tack was 
way. It was a half length at the mile 
sixteenth, a length at a mile and an eighth 
it was two lengths, three lengths and an asto' 
ing four lengths at the wire. Seabiscuit had won 
in record time. 

They triumphantly led him into the winner 
circle and placed a wreath of chrysanthemun 
around his neck. He cheerfully nibbled at a 
ple of them before being led to his barn wh 
the grooms and swipes had broken o th 
of champagne which traditionally goes 
winner of the Pimlico Special. Seabiscuit 
the undisputed champion. 

That same afternoon President Rooseve! 
late for his press conference. The White H 
correspondents wondered what grave affair 
state had delayed the Chief Executive. They 
found out. He admitted that he’d been held ur 
by listening to the broadcast of the Biscuit's 
smashing victory. And he smiled approvingly 
when he said it. 


‘ 


victor hits the 


atart 
sr 
ré e¢ 


stunned 


win acclaim as half 


race as a spring- 


ree starters with 


But this test the 


1é¢- 


And 


scene of Whirl- 
n Mr. Longtail 


uld } J 


r | 


‘ 
, 


* 


ade the Pimlico 
arou 
His 
and 
r had won eight 
the Biscuit had 1 
in all ten of his 
vas a natural of 


Howard, owner 
Then 
he Admiral, who 


pen e 


‘ 


op weight of 120 


e terms to How- 
sed to find him 


sor 


WOOD, FIELD AND STREAM 
a 


Open seasons bloom in the fall; Federal 
like flowers in the spring. Today|Ppowers over migratory 
starts the firing for upland game va ll vette se jc 
on Long Island. In some instances | nook opening and elesing: ¢ 
the seasons for the various species |T ong Island. The woodc: 
are longer than in the rest of the|i., this part of New York S 
a ee the island apart from|enting Long Island, 

J 1 . ,, , 

The outstanding instance is af- Monday. 
forded by the season for pheasants, 
which become legal quarry along 
with grouse, quail, woodcock, rab- This is also a big day for 
bits and squirrels. When the Con-/small-game hunters Penn: 
servation Department cut the sea-|vania, while sportsmen who 
son for ringnecks to five and a/themselves in Maine will disc 
half days in New York, Long Is-|the deer season open in all of 
land’s season was untouched. It/State’s counties. 
runs to Dec. 31, or two solid! Pennsylvania game 
months. The daily bag limit is four | be pursued starting t 
and that for the season thirty, as|ruffed grouse, bobwhite quail, I 
compared to the one cock bird or|garian partridge, wild tu 
four for a season you are able|(there are several local 
to take elsewhere. jtions), pheasants, rabi 


squirrels. They may be 
Little Public Huntin > ¢ , 
g jing the entire month o 


Although the vast majority of|The trapping season 
this State’s hunters may look upon/vania also begins today for 
Long Island’s favored status with|skunks, otters and raccoons 
envy, there is a reason. This de-| It looks as though Maine's 
rives from the fact that public|season will be a good one, alth 
hunting on the island is negligible, |officials are wary of predicti 
most of the huntable land being|that it will equal last year’s. 
privately owned. The landed gentry |all-time bag of 24,408 was re 
shoot their own pheasants. tered in 1943, and Earle Dou 
Most of the Long Island seasons /| thinks it will be somewhat le 
over which the State Conservation | year despite the presence of a near- 
Department has jurisdiction close|record number of hunters ; 
on Dec. 31, the exception being that|and continued snows throt 
for grouse, which ends Dec. 15.}most regions contributed to 
The woodcock season, set by the!season’s exceptional take. 


By JOHN RENDEL 


Government under 
gam 


rsey 





Other States to Start 
he 


odaay 


lz 


Table for High Tide for Waters Adjacent to New York 


Nov. 1—Sun rises at 6:26 A. M.; sets at 4:53 P. M 
Willets | Peconic Bay) Fire isiand 
Point (Cutchogue) | intet 
P.M.| AM, P.M. / AM. PM. | 4M PM 
8:18} 11:20 


} th 41 7:18 7:43 
6:39 0:07; 0:02 12:13{ 0:11 12:30] 8:04 &:99 
sees 9:27 O:58) 0:4812:58) 1:02 1:20) 8:52 9:23 
»+ 20:17 10:52) 2:36 1:44) 1:56 2:13] 9:42 10:17 
11:09 11:48) 2:28 2:34 2:52 3:08) 10:34 11:19 
Monday, Nov. 6.... 12:02) 3:32 3:40 B:§ 4:07 | 11:27 
Tuesday, Nov. 7 0:43 12:55) 4:50 5:05 


4 58 5:09 0 08 12 
Hours are given in Eastern Standard Time. 


Now 
Leadce 
aw se 


’ 


Barnegat 
Bay Inlet 
A.M ul 
7:33 ~«7T 


vandy Hook | 
A M 


7:53 s 


Wednesday, Nov. 1... 
Thursday, Nov, 2 
Friday, Nov. 3 

Saturday, Nov. 4 
Sunday, Nov. 5 2 
20 


Add one hour for Eastern War Time 


For high tide at Asbury Park and Belmar, N. J., deduct 15 minutes from Sa 
For high tide at Atlantic City. N. J. (mear bridge). add 1 bour and 10 minutes 


Hook time. 
(Supplied by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey) 


2 
to Sandy 


Rockingham Park Resalts 


SALEM, N. 
By The Associated Press 


FIRST RACE — Purse $1,200; allowances 
year-olds; six furlongs (chute 
Valdina Idol, 118..(Hettinger) 20.80 

Elmo T., 11 (E. Robart 

West Fleet (Balzaretti 
Time—1:14 Tiny Sis, Jamoke 
Knox Hill, Phellmond, Friend 
Eternal Chance also ran 
SECOND RACE — Purse 
year-olds and upward 
Balmy Spring, 117 (Martin) 
Hardship, 106 (Oliver 
Early Delivery, 109.( Patterson) 
Time — 1:13 4-5 Ship Signal, Kleig Light 
Daggers Drawn, Sunny Plume, Blue Booties, 
Town Hill, Taking Ways, Army Grey and Val- 
dina Rex also ran 

Daily Double—(Valdina Idol and Balmy 
}Spring) paid $118.00 

| THIRD RACE—Purse $1,600 
olds and upward six furlongs 
White Time, 111..( Balzaretti) 8.00 
Happy Prince, 107. (Hettinger) 2.40 
My Zaca, lil (Robart) 3.20 
Time—1:12 4-5. Wingspar, Might Be, Kengar 
and Buena Ventura also ran 


Border Battle, 111 
Time—1:56 
ista. Weesgc 

|EIGHTH RAC 
year-olds ar 

ng 

{ 


Ider 
and 
‘EP 


d 


a I p 
Hasty 
sold 


me 


7.20 
3.80 


+40 
2.60 
7 80 
Me 
and 


| 


Go 
I 
air 


8 
18 


Jes Lov 


| 
or Foe 


F 
r 
nan 
Trac 
$1,300; -claiming: 4 
six furlongs (chute) 
7.20 340 3.20 
480 4.20 
$3.20 


claiming; 3-year- 

(chute) 
4.80 
3.80 


3.00 





claiming; 3- 
one mile and a six- 


5.20 


year-olds and upward; 
teenth. 
Pomiva, 111 
Famous Lady, 


3.20 2.60 


4.40 


(Robart) 

100. ..(Chaffin) 3.20 
Miss Amanda, 106. (Hettinger) 4.00 
Time—1:49. Good China, Hindu Spy, Queen 

Echo, Precious Years, Omachat, Ticco and Our) 
Beeb also ran. | 
FIFTH RACE—Purse $2,000; allowances; 3- 
year-olds and upward; one mile and a six- 


teenth | 
Mixer, 120 ..(Turnbull) 840 3.40 2.40 
(Fator) 3.40 2 


Float Me, 111 2.40 | 
(Hettinger) 2.2) 


Goober Lad, 114 2.2 
Time—1:48. Towakee, Cyrus P., Gmustark | 
and Chance Yen also ran | 
SIXTH RACE — Purse $2,000; allowances; | 
ear-olds; one mile and a sixteenth 
aTransbest, 118 (Turnbull) 2.60 2.20 
Slender Lady, 115.(Hettinger) 2.20 2.: 
aJackstraw, 118....(Summers) 
Time—1: 49 2-5 Pilot Light, 
Darby Duluth also ran 
aFour Oaks Stable entry 
SEVENTH RACE—Purse $1,400: claiming: 3 
year-olds and upward; one mile and a fur- 
long 
Janegri, 108 
Budded, 112 


\neeemegeas ————- —= 
BOATS FOR SALE 
FOR “ALE, 50’ cruiser, Al condition, 12 beds, 
galley quarters. Sacrifice. See Capt. Mutz 
Kraemer's Gas Station, College Point, N. Y 
OUTB“ARD motors, used—bought, sold and) 
traded: top prices paid Faribar Trans-O- 
| Press. 49 W. 37th. N Y Cc WI 7-2099 | 
| ARMY CANVAS COVERS, So ft. All sizes. 
N. ¥. SALVAGE, 144 CHAMBERS ST. 


if you are 4F, 1C of not now available te the» 
armed forces, here's your chance to serve. 

Help keep the invasion tide flowing in this 
Vital Service. We need men for LAND DUTY er 
SHORE STATIONS in the NEW YORK AREA 
men qualified as 


TYPISTS 
PHARMACISTS 
WAITERS 
OPTOMETRISTS 
COOKS 


a 


ns 


Y Gun 





MAINTENANCE MEN 
BAKERS 
LAB. TECHNICIANS 
BUTCHERS 
REGISTERED NURSES 
DRILL MASTERS STENOGRAPHERS 
DECK HANDS MASTERS-AT-ARMS 
PORTERS, AND OTHERS 


UNIFORMS, MEALS and QUARTERS ARE PROVIDED 
Apely LT. J. R. GOODMAN 


39 Broadway teom ico New York City 
MUR ee nr eR NS AT 


2.40 
4 80 


560 3.20 
4.20 


(Pollard 
(Patterson 








THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. BUSINESS 


HALL OF COLUMBIA |TRADE POLICY STIRS|tssi ust. st" KNIT GOODS PRICING 2£S'GNERS DEFENDED 


port restrictions and some the fear ON ‘DREAM PRODUCTS’ 


GOBS 10 WESLEYAN FEAR OF EXPORTERS ==" smc co) HIT FOR SCARCITIES ccc cason 


MAY SEE ACTION AGAINST NOTRE DAME 


BALE, BRIDGES 
<oneeete he li hich will satisfy that de- els radically advar 
———_—— | Regular Back and Watts, Sub| ContinuedGovernmentinroads, esc cemperartey ovedtacbien ys Gregory Says Low-End Items war ofefrings as being 
. . Signs Was Allack ‘ 
. Are Being Driver: Off Market | po vont Arena, incuats 
Test Cornell Defensés Early Output Quotas Seen | a 
: Brooklyn Eleven Co-Coaches | Aigsies | SERS. Poe SR ee nen ge ple ob pamggamegp 
. ——_ . ment Association a 
Columbia’s football team, al-} Continued trading between Gov- ; . Incompetence and inexperience) , |. said. “there is 
by Reducing Materials Used of staff members of the Office Stltee- Saeed te the. 


28 L + 
panies to an establishment of a jefforts in creating post-war 
‘Named to Finish Campaign as End, Transferred by Navy— | Industry Reluctance to Allot | Por ttacked 
—Cheney Urges Relief at a meeting 
: —Plan Offense Changes Sibler Says Goal to Be Attained |Sheraton. “In my 


‘STATEMENT w¥ GALLERY| 


Says He Asked for Cawthen’s | 
Resignation at Suggestion 





of Topping, Club’s Owner 
By LOUIS EFFRAT 
Together with the announce- 


ment by General Manager Tom | ‘i ag 


Gallery that Ed Kubale and Frank| 
Bridges, assistants to Pete Caw-| 
thon, who on Monday severed his| 
coaching connections with the! 
Brooklyn Tigers, have been signed | 


as co-coaches of the Flatbush foot-| 7 “<4 


ball aggregation, the front-office 
boss yesterday disclosed that Caw- | 


thon’s resignation had been asked | 


for by Gallery. 

“I would have preferred to let 
the matter drop gracefully,” Gal- 
lery said, “but since Cawthon has) 
g$een fit to utter blasts in the news- 


papers, I might just as well let jt} on Saturday. 


be known that Pete was fired. I} 


.” 


possibilities to replace injured Hal Hamberg in the game at Baltimore 


Associated Press Wirephoto (U. 8S. Navy) 


ready weakened by the loss of/ernment commissions, rather than 
Wayne Morgan, fullback, suffered| through private charnels, and a re- 
another blow yesterday when it|luctance upon the part of domestic- 
was learned that Joe Hall, starting|minded manufacturers to allot 
left halfback, and George Watts,/quotas for export from early pro- 
substitute right end, were trans-|duction, were listed by exporters 
ferred by the Navy to Wesleyan.|as two of the chief difficulties to 


Coach Lou Little will be forced|mediate post-war period, according 
to make several shifts in his start-|to a survey made public yesterday 
ing line-up for the contest with|by the Export (fanagers Club of 
Cornell at Baker Field Saturday.| New York. 





against Colgate last week to re-|ment, hardware and similar lines 
place Morgan and every substitute|expect that export prices will be 
back on the squad will be tried in| advanced 20 per cent, if the Office 
Hall’s spot. of Price Administration will allow 

manufacturers to recover in- 
Kondratovich Good Prospect creased material, labor and service 


Walter Kondratovich, a civilian) costs. However, exporters of 





freshman, turned in a fine per-|chemicals and dyestuffs, after 


formance in his first game against| pointing out that in the pre-war 
Colgate and it is possible that he|period such products were sold at 
will take over the position. prices lower than those offered in 


Although Morgan is due to re-|the domestic market, indicated that 


turn from his Navy leave, Little|/the same situation may prevail 
has decided to start Apel at full.|/after the war to meet competition. 


Morgan, who missed last week’s| “During the war period prices 
contest, will be transferred to the have been at ceiling under OPA| 
|Prairie State next Monday. 

The loss of Watts leaves the ages,” one chemical exporter} 
“No doubt in the post-war 


regulations because of the short- 


Lions with a serious shortage of | Slated 
ends. It is likely that Bob Heller | competitive picture there will be a 


|will take over the right-end posi-| decline, although it is not likely to 


tion where he played the majority reach the samg level of pre-war) 
juntil we run into depression years.” | © 


Otto Apel, the only other available} The survey also disclosed that) 
halfback, was shifted to fullback|exporters of home laundry equip-|make processes giving a higher 


A post-ward trend to effect 
economies by reducing raw mate- 
rials required was predicted for 
the pulp and paper industry by 
Cc. J. Sibler, supervisor of power of 
the West Virginia Pulp and Paper 


They are to report there today. be faced in foreign trade in the im-|Company, in an address last night 


before the metropolitan section of 
the American Society of Mechani- 
cal Engineers at the Engineering 
Societies Building. 

“The high cost of wood will 


yield attractive,” Mr. Sibler said. 
“This may involve changing from 
sulphite and soda to the Kraft 
process; greater use of semi-chemi- 
cal pulp as produced by the 
Asplund and other processes; and 
more extensive use of ground pulp. 
This in turn will introduce new 
bleach processes specially adapted 
for these pulps. In finishing, the 
trend to machine coating will con- 
tinue, thereby eliminating costly 
methods used in the past. Greater 
recovery of by-products will also 
receive special attention.” 


Bethlehem Wins Safety Award 


BETHLEHEM, Pa., Oct. 31-—The 
local plant of the Bethlehem Steel 


|Company has been awarded first 


place in the National Safety Coun- 
il’s Meta! Section safety contest 


Price Administration has brought/around. Manufacturers ° 
about a situation in the underwear|that all they need do | 


manufacturing industry which isthe old dies and star 
gradually driving low-end mer-| ity going tp have a rude 
chandise from the market, Robert} ‘. - ds ioe 0 
Gregory, former OPA underwear | io0 nr dennis dy . 
consultant, and at present on the} q-o4m designs,  . 
industry advisory committee, as “lt eae, ee 
serted yesterday. 

Mr. Gregory, who heads the 
C. C. Valentine Company, told a 
press conference called by the Un-| rat i. the tune 
derwear Institute at the Biltmore), 0410 ll 4 hy] 

Hotel that a lack of low-end pro-|°” 7 we th pes Plantae hat Be 
ducers in the underwear industry| t)o-w ~ pce ll ney Tren hoe 
would seriously hamper any pro- Hj pie a gees, 9 vag +B 
gram of re-employment in the| "0 4re only waiting tor fitiers 
post-war period. | Surrender to jump in to the mark 

There was no quarrel with the with mercHandise that has een 
principle of price control, Mr./*'8ned along the lines of 
Gregory stated, but his experience | *¢chniques of prosucti 
with staff members of OPA had | terials developed during the war 
convinced him that they lacked ™ = - 
understanding of the Saamaheaben BUSINESS RECORDS 
ing processes in the underwear 
field. BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS 

Roy A. Cheney, president of the SOUTHERN DISTRICT 
Underwear Institute stated that Petitions Filed—By 
|while long-established manufactur- | 4DOLPN ALLEGEA. guard 
lers were frozen to their prices of| MRS GERTRUDE © 
March, 1942, no provision had| “i Par* Ave. ¥ 
beeen made by OPA for price fix-|MAX GRELLER. | 
ing of new manufacturers coming|yATALe PRLLICAN 
into the field. As a result, he said, | Liabilities, $4361 
newcomers in many instances had) Petition fer Butenst 


| FREDERICK {UBEL. ba 
adopted the price ranges of hiigh|" ye ER - ~~ 8 


is ‘dreaming 

old tools and dies car 
produce for the pent- 
demands,” Mr Are! 











en. After all, something had to . ° . =e . his 4 installment 
4 7 r ] akes P art in Practice at Y ale ot Pete Mortellaro, who has been| Porters cited an “ability to pay in| @Anounced here today. er ei neem 
be done, after five straight de- . . ’ , a a , 
on the sick list for more than a’ dollars and trading between Gov- fa 
Heads Hotel Exposition Food Fair St Ine. supers Petitions Fileé—By 
. , a 00 air Stores, inc., SUPC=|mvING KIRSCHENBAUM, me 
this done with the knowledge and| |between private merchants here} Frank L. Andrews, president of| market chain, has acquired the Big) individually and riy ¢ 
etro Tool Co 
(the owner) but, I might add, at} Little put his first and second-|they were apprehensive of the/elected chairman of the Twenty-|American Grocery Company, Ho-| ; 
his suggestion. Saturday—Penn, 196-Pounder, to Re- string teams through a scrimmage| probability that a considerabte) ninth National Hotel Exposition, it} boken, according to announcement | bil 
‘in insurance pe 
, . sas P : : — . 
newspaper men in the Brooklyn place Gillis at Left Halfback Berth The third-stringers imitated the| ported in this country ready for| exposition committee. The exposi-|land, president of the Food Fair| Maiverne—Liabilities ‘ 
dressing room at Ebbets Field yes- Cornell plays from a single wing-| purchases “will be ‘or the pur-|tion will be held from Nov. 13 to 16|}company, with headquarters in| Bankruptcy Discharges 
my rm oo on By ALLISON DANZIG on the defense. Several players| ccc" SSE = 
as nea men to e iger piayers. ® , ‘ ; : 
yer. play Special to Tus New Youk Ties. were being groomed to fill, Mor- ARRIVAL OF BUYERS 
new contracts with salary boosts, | th h tion uties 
will finish the season and, if they|The telephone rang in the coaches’ . ~ pee 1 imi 
: In addition to Fusilli, Yale is} Apel, limited to about an hour RETAIL , 
f fut As Gall Scheaf, linens: Miss R. Young, ribbons,/ to-wear. Best, misses’ sportswear 
it: “We won't look for. > aneie Specialist Phil Moonves, one) mq See}, Bucknell center, and Ar-|4id not attend the workout. Allied Steves Corp., 1069 Bway. Miss A. Crouthers. girls’ wear. high school | cuesrgr Pa.—Morris Mailman, gen. mdse Creprewenting. 
of Howie Odell’s assistants, took! iq whitler, 195-pound Rochester - AKRON—A. Polsky Co.; Mrs. D. Hollander,| shop; Miss J. Solomon, misses’ sportswear: | KimMorE, Pa. — Gladstein'’s: 1 Gladstein gi -ew &- 
: -TIMORE—O'N ; C. Gilzow, l- rting goods; R. C ins, div. mdse. mgr.. 7 Judge. 
do the job and I don’t see why| He had no more than put the re-| : ee a le. _ k ahi 2 Atte, Plece goods: S. W. Perry, men’s furnishings: TASTER, Ale—Ghirtey Ann Shope: H. Wein- ’ 
they can’t.” . jlast Saturday, are due to report, ITHACA. N. Y¥.. Oct. 31 (* BOSTON—C. F. Hovey Co.; J. Allen, boys’| Miss J. Taes, junior coats, suits, sportswear: | Stem. women’s coats, suits, dresses, acces- | B. Davis, art 
y A A, N. so (e-— | Sear: L. Wilson, draperies basement, K. A. Kaiser, men’s furnishings: LATROBE Pa.—Rose Style Shop: Mrs draperies 
into a smile. “It’s Fusilli,” he an- mo pone | 1. COR . ses, acces : 
Bridges, according to present| halfback here as a substitute last/ practice today after an eight-day| ‘am, foods, woolens, luggage: (T. Fi Dutty:| omens dstdrcascs ny Grosse SACKA. | rAMI—Bonnie “Fogs, “Mrs. 1 Maliman, chil-| «oye te 5 pornes 
2S, oO present , : 
: to the group in the room, and grins} : Nav 
plans, will coach the backs and} * > | discharge from the Navy and was both Harry Rubin and Simon De- mdse _mar yard goods. Farrar, wash goods; Mrs. M. Freeman.| Daly, corsets, underwear, children’s wear, | we w ih. 
and yelps of satisfaction broke out) i, uniform today, about twenty Roberge, lamps: CM. Bivens. summer fur. | lamps: Miss L. Solomon, Miss V. Atkinson, | _ hosiery. |“ Conley, boys’ clothing 
pounds heavier. Bill Adler, Roch-| 1) the gap left by the transfer of lf . elry: F. Wilton, div. mdse. mgr.:; Miss R. 
=: z cet aie’ sothind eontewears aiiss Me: Fitzgibbons, children’s wear, 2-6; Miss V 8. Hoffman, 101 W. ist 
ty | ; boys’ pea jackets, mackinaws, men’s, boys'| D. Wilcox, art need! 
] 5 e é {——- . ‘ : ch ° toe , . iss E. C ’ jor-miss| School shop: basement, A. Adams, knit un- - ial ilies Gneieendiaietne 
Kubale, center on the lengendary/civijian in the group inquired of |e”, changed ser Seeah Mins” C. Whittemore, sults, | detwear: Mrs. R. Robbing, aast.: FL. Smith, | gRovelty, sweaters,, furnishings, jE Rae See 
raying Colonels eleven of Centre| she Yale coaches 


linens 


| 
liked Pete a lot and was sorry tol lhi E D h L ° S of the game against the Raiders 
i _ ~ ' ; j i . Chapter XIII of the ’ 
make the move, but it had to hap-|#" USUI, LnX- artmout ine SAP,  |Fither Jonn Mesziota or Walt Me- Replying to the question of what | in SE eee ee ee ne peees SAS Were) eer pin bb ane 
Vicar will start at tackle in place| “special difficulty” they feared, ex-|Steel plants were entered, it was “profiteering. ‘ie his income at $3.600 and 
a ee Food Chain Expands EASTERN DISTRICT 
feats. Furthermore, not only was week, jernment commissions rather than 
. . . 
approval of Capt. Dan Topping | Marine T rainee to Face Old Mates in Bowl Reserves Put on Cornell Plays (nq abroad.” Others reported that|/the Hotel New Yorker, has been|Bear food chain operated by the| Cite 
Gallery made this statement to against the third eleven yesterday.| amount of the funds that are re-|was announced yesterday by the|made yesterday by George Fried-| .(\5,\p"onc pov 
terday, a few minutes after he had —_—_—_—_—_— ae back formation with the regulars|chase of capital goods, at least|at the Hotel Commodore. Philadelphia. ' wason. 3215 Newk 
Kubale and Bridges, who received P: ’ i ’ x 
NEW HAVEN, Conn., Oct. 31—|Dartmouth both use the T-forma- & n’s punting and Watt's kick-off Arriving buyers may register in this column by telephoning LAckawanna 4-1000 
. r .  - , . COLUMBUS—F. & R. Lazarus Co.: O. J,| TAMAQUA, Pa.—S. W. Miller; E. Miller, ready- | CHARLESTON, W. Va 
prove themselves, will be in line|dressing room at Thompson Field, ; of practice a week 7 ; 
expecting several other transfers. p , and Morgan CLASSIFIED BY OFFICE trimmings; Mrs. S. B. Grossman, lingerie: J. Hartblay, 505 8th Ave. INCINNATI- 
coac uu Miss L. Schuler, asst.; E. L. Foster, luggage “~ ; ; y 
eS eee: Ane SES SER the ool. fullback, who played in the Bowl Cornell Resumes Practice ALTIMO! 2 gap ge = Bg lows: Miss M. Judge. g 
PORTLAND. Me —Porte 
ceiver to his ear when he broke yo 
aks tented Bieter and Tom Scannell, who played| Cornell's football squad resumed|sosTON—Jordan Marsh. Co.: A. A. Burns,| Mrs, D."M. Coie. women's, misses’, larger |TATROBE, Pa—Rose Style Shop: Mrs. R-| ROCHESTER—McCurdy & 
e nounced dramatically, in an aside , ° 
’ rear, has returned with a medical =, ae ah DETROIT—J. L. Hudson Co.: R. J. Moff [a ina. seemed 
¥ layoff. Coach Carl Snavely used| Tiottt, asst.. piece soods: aioe Oe ewelry; E. D. Patton. woolen piece goods: NEW BRITAIN—Fair Deept. Store; Miss H. | | EF a a 
ale w ine. | ' guard i : Norris, 8 
— to diggane) athe oe ne all over the place. In ten seconds| gulis at left guard in an effort to| carpets. lnoleums: J. T. Norris. summer ful | asst. millinery: Miss £. Hunt, fashion jew- NORTHAMPTON, Pa.—Coleman’s; ¥. Coleman, rye 
school ‘coach at Fort Smith ak flat Chief Specialist Moonves was! ester halfback, was also supposed! Co.capt. G t Eli Bob Wi + siris’ elothing . watenes Supt. Steen, 28 W 
’ "ion his wa ick up his man. < ‘ o-Capt. Gran 1S. OD Wile) Se Se ; - Mears, asst. children’s wear; Miss L. Roth, ., | CLEVELAND—Balley C 
used to be head coach at Baylor. | “Who's Pak 9X = nan to come on, but his orders have} chester worked at center. Holmes, boys’ furnishings; Miss E. Findlay, asst. infants’ wear. Miss L.’ Kneeland, high |BALTIMORE—Regel Shop; D. Harris, men’s,| embroideries lamps, | 
Odell was not too optimistic peony Miss C. Whittemore, suits, millinery; C. G. Closson. lamps, gifts, lug- 
_ a n louses; Miss A. Kaye, asst. suits, uniforms; ~ q 4 domestics, curtains, draperies. derwear, rot 
College the year Harvard was up- about his team’s prospects against STENGEL WILL HELP PENN Miss Leerman, representing; basement. J. W.| Sage: Miss A. F. Julian, asst. children's) sACeRSTOWN, Md. — Earle’s; Mr, Linzner,| dresses.’ I. Lantheaum 
set, later coached at his alma 


mater, at Southwestern and for 
four years was line mentor at} 
Texas Christian University. 


to add punch to the Tigers. “We'll; 


Cry for Help Heard 
“He's our new line,” Odell told/that the Green will be weakened 


him happily. “He came down from|nearly as much as reports of its 


~er Be , |Hanover to give us some help|losses w 

Kubale said changes will be|against Dartmouth this week, and, 
made in the offense in an effort! boy, do we need help.” |P 
Half an hour later Marine Nick/| Gillis and the 


Dartmouth. He doesn’t believe 


ould indicate, whereas he 


lis genuinely concerned over the de- 


parture of Prchlik, Hansen and 
loss of Whiting, who 


give them some spreads and add a) Fysilli, late of the Dartmouth foot-|may be able to play in the final 
sort of modified T, but, of course,| pall team, was wearing a blue jer-| Same. 


that will take time,’’ Kubale Stat-| sey with the number 75 and posing} 


“We were a better team up to 


ed. “Of course, much of the stufflin a formal squad picture as non-/|last week,” said Odell, “than most 


we've been using will have to be 
| 


retained until the players absorb] against the fence. 
the new plays. We certainly hope| after, he was learning a tackle’s 
assignments 
Out on the gridiron the players|and the chances are that he will 
be in John Prchlik’s left tackle slot 
when Yale plays 


to improve on our record to date.” 


lost no time in falling into the 
swing of the new Order. They lis- 
tened attentively to the coaches 
and were completely absorbed in 





much, much better right now.” 
A Difficult Assignment 


Admittedly, Kubale and Bridges 
move in as head men at a most 
inopportune moment, what with 
mext Sunday’s rival at Ebbets 
Field being the Philadelphia Ea- 
gles, who are undefeated and very 
much in the running for a play-off 
berth. In less than a week the Ti- 
gers not only will have to master 


perfect a defense against Greasy 
Neale's T-attack. 
“I know,” said Gallery, “it’s a| 


tough spot, but even if we don’t|203 pounds, exactly the weight of 
Capt. Mac Whiting, who was lost/have either Ballard or Schaffner 
at guard two weeks ago with a/as his running mate, with the lat- 
;ter looming as the probable start- 

The blow has hit Yale heavily,|er. Bull Montana continues tc be 
for there is probably no better|the first-string center, with Blan- 
guard in the East than Whiting./ning next. 


win we'll have wide-open, interest- 
ing football to present to the fans. 
I'm sure we'll have the latter 
from now on.” 

Among the Brooklyn players in 
yesterday’s practice was Frank 


Sachse, a tailback with speed and| But the need for tackles is greater 
and Odell decided to try Nick in|out in time, but the coaches know|ball team over the Bitter Root and} perroit—Ernst Kern Co.; H. Copley, base- 


It should not/little about him and are waiting 





passing prowess. A foot injury 


has handicapped Sachse, but he is|Prchlik’s position. 


chalantly as a Yale captain draped 
Fifteen minutes | 


formation, 


Saturday, 
Dartmouth in the Bowl. 

of Dartmouth’s best line- 
what was going on. The change in}men at guard, Fusilli, who was 
the coaching did not appear to have|transferred here 
left any sulking athletes around.|trainee, will carry a big share of 
Rather, there was a spirit of de-/the burden, offsetting Yale’s loss 
termination on all sides. As Pug! of 
Manders declared: “This isn’t a/the 
bad team. If we had a fellow like|/Frank Gillis, 
Frank Sinkwich to loosen up the|played their last game Saturday 
opposition our record would be| against 
shipped out. 

was not due to report 
here until midnight, but he cut 
short his leave in order to take 
part in the practice today with the 
hope of being ready to get into the 
game against his erstwhile team- 


Prehlik and Westi 


Rochester 


Fusilli Weighs 203 Pounds 


Under the circumstances, it was| 
superfluous to ask him how he felt 
the new plays but will have to|about playing against Dartmouth.| 
screwy season,” 
swered with a grin. 





broken leg. 


people realized. Now we're so thin 
in replacements that we'll just 


have to hope for luck and try to 
beat the other fellow with some- 
thing else than manpower.” 


With Dudley also gone to the 


Marines and Clausen lost through 
an injury, backfield reserves con- 
isist. practically entirely of Van 
|Kirk, Whitler and Scannell. 


a Marine} 


Loh Elis’ Leading Passer 
Bill Penn, 196 pounds, will step 


jinto Gillis’ shoes at left half, and 
Along with Halfback)the coaches are happy to have him. 
Penn has improved vastly of late - 4 inhi.| Rosen, suits, dresses, 
pie gs pres peg tne gle» Bosc Don Kellett, who saw the Michi Re Te 5 rn 
thority. George Loh, the best pass- gan has an outstanding first) “EBANON, Pa—Rose Singer Shop, H. Singer, 
er, will continue at quarter, Buzzy 
Gher at right half and Roger 
Barksdale at full. 


Don McCullough, who was out 


Hollingshead has taken Hansen’s/ oyt of the William and Mary game} aresses. cottons 
place at right tackle and does | and held him down to fifteen min-|UTICA—Frank T. Howard Co.; F. T 


Tom Smith, a crack guard, will 


Seel might beat both of them 


expected to be available against|take him too long to master his|to see him in action. He may be 


the Eagles On the dark and/j|assignments 


doubtful side, however, are Bob) 
Masterson and Bill Reynolds, both 
of whom suffered rib injuries 
against the Boston Yanks last! 


here, since Yale and'shifted to another position. 


C. C. N. Y. TESTS OFFENSE! COHEN TRIED AT CENTER | 


lowers of rugby, the British rough) (oye; hosiery, underwear, sportswear 


Sunday. | Jazwinski and Resnick, Back in| Will Serve as Replacement for 


The club’s roster was cut to 
twenty-eight yesterday. Bob Tro-| 
color, former Giant back, signed] 
by Cawthon two weeks ago, — 
unconditionally released, while W. 


Shape Again, Rejoin Squad 


preparation for its return 


game with the University of Con- gressiveness in his team’s attack, 


Miller in Kingsmen’s Line 


Determined to implant more ag- 


S. (Foots) LaFitte, Ouachita end,| necticut on Saturday, City College|G,a-n Lou Oshins sent the Brook- 


departed for his home to be in- 
ducted into the service. 


Long Session for Giants 


through an unusually long Tuesday | 


against the Eagles and then in-| 
dulged in kicking, passing and sig-| 
nal practice. Bill Paschal and| 
Howie Livingston did more pass-! 
ing than customarily, which may 
and may not be significant. 

Owen warned his charges that 
the Yanks, having upset the Tigers, 
may have received a big “lift” 
from that triumph, their first, and, 
as a result, would be tougher than 
they were on opening day, when! 
the Giants won, 22—10, at Boston. | 


Exhibition Bout for Joe Louis 

DETROIT, Oct. 31 “P)—Sget. Joe 
Louis, world heavyweight cham- 
pion, came home today for a week's 
furlough visit with the folks and 
one of his first acts was to sign) 
the papers for a three-round exhi-| 
bition Friday with Johnny Denson. 
The bout will be an added feature 
of the Jake La Motta-George | 
Kochan fight at Olympia 


drilled on offense yesterday. 
Recalling that several promising 


| games had been ended by fumbles, 
{Coach Leon A. Miller stressed ball 

At the Polo Grounds yesterday,| handling. A scrimmage ended the 
Steve Owen directed the Giants|two-hour session. 


|has a sprained hip. 
School Results 
CROSS-COUNTRY 

St. Augustine's 20 


Woodmere Acad 
Columbia Gr 


Garden City H 


Northeast Phila 
Masthaum Voe 


Penn Charter 
Staten Island D 


SWIMMING 


Brooklyn Tech 5? 
Erasmus Hall 


New Utrecht 50 
FIELD HOCKEY 
Brooklyn College 1 


lyn College football squad through 
last two/a stiff two-hour workout yesterday 
on the Flatbush gridiron in prep- 
aration for the return game with 
City College next Tuesday. 


Oshins devoted much of his 


ane : ° Miller reported that Art Jaz-|time to coaching Co-captain Al 
ae = snes x Sun-| winski, left tackle, and Hal Res-|reyinson on his Ssatien ~* signal | 
day's meeting with the Yanks./ nick, reserve back, have recovered 
The Giants looked at pictures| ¢on, 
of last week-end’s losing effort)» 


caller. Levinson then called of- F 
- | the! tensive signals from his tackle po-| Melville PT 
Y. U. encounter and rejoined) sition as the first team scrimmaged 
squad. He also indicated that/tnhe reserves. 

Dick Goldenberg would fill in at! 
right guard for Herb Mitzner who|,41) are being considered. Bob 
Cohen, 230-pound reserve tackle, is 
being tested at center and will 
probably spell Marty Miller at that 
position. One tackle and two start- 
ing guard posts are still open, 
Oshins intimated. 


Several changes in the forward 


Maryland Game Shifted 
COLLEGE PARK, Md., Oct. 31 


|\(P\—The latest is that University 
of Maryland's football team will 
meet the University of Virginia in|Tech and Boston College, will re-| ment. I. Schifter, sportswear, A. 1. Breslow 





Hagan, linens, Gomnesties. weeins: L. poem. 
. . P housewares; Miss S. ubin, house dresses; 
Guard, Again in Top Shape, Will! miss M. A. Falvey. infants’ wear; Miss D. 
. : : Cassassa, asst.; Miss M. Sullivan, underwear. 
Play Against Michigan HARRISBURG—Pomeroy’s, Inc.; Miss B. Mar- 
vin tlle inn chel, dresses. 
POTTSVILLE—Pomeroy’s, Inc.; L. Bailey, 
PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 31 (2)—| Presses ¥ 

i i ¢ ; . | READING—Pomeroy’s, Inc.: R. Kalbach, men’s 

The mythical national champion-| gy fit eee BF 


ship won't be decided when Penn/|syracusEe—Dey Bros. & Co.: D. Howard, 
ichi yrs s4, | fabrics; Miss M. Sullivan, infants’ wear. 
and Michigan clash on Franklin) witkes-saRRE—Pomeroy'’s, Inc, Miss J. 


Field Saturday, but the result will} Dietz, junior wear: Miss P. Jones, corsets. 


help clear up the 1944 sectional J. Anstendig, 450 7th Ave. 
muddle. AKRON Madison's. Inc. H. Madison. dresses 
; BALTIMORE—Wonder othes; . Greenspan, 
Michigan surprised Purdue, lead-| "Coats. suits. 


ing contender for Ohio State’s big | BYOOMSBERG, Pa —A' 


ten crown, with a stunning 40-14! srinGePORT—Sally'’s; M Costello coats 
, BUTLER, Pa.—I. K. Kaffe, sults, furs, dresses 
upset last Saturday, and Penn, the CHICAGO—Estelle-Vogue; Mrs. F. Smith, coats, 


Cast’s ranking squad until Satur-| dresses ir — 
, hi > 7.) , CHICAGO—Spaulding's; rm ° senus, 
day, was whipped decisively by) “(io juts 


Navy, 26-0. CLEVELAND — Schneider's; J, Schneider, 


Whether Penn will regain its| o{iifius Madison's: Miss L. Shapiro, 


standing depends on how it fares nee on 8. DN. ¥. Store: S, Margolin 
: ‘ P 7 7, : —N. ato . ’ 
against Michigan. The experts are!” coats. suits. dresses, sportswear. ‘ 
j i y rerine F: DETROIT—Sheldon Furs; 8S. Gaull, coats, suits 
picking the Wolverines, although DOVER, Ohio—Schwartz's; A. Schwartz, suits 
Capt. Bob W lese, star fullbac k, dresses. sportswear , 
played his last game against Pur-|FITCHBURG. Mass.—Baylin's; 
due. | HOPKINSVILLE, Ky.—Arnold Shop, Miss s 
Coach George Munger has his| Myers. San ee accessories, chil- 
weekly worrying cap on. Scout|HunTINGTON, Ww. Va.—Belle’s, Mrs. M. 
cottons 





Mrs. A. Baylin, 


" . IRONTON 

gan-Purdue fray, reported: “Michi-| dresses. sportswear 

” dresses 

m. MIAMI BEACH—Rubinstein’s, G. Farkas, dress- 
; ; es, beachwear 

Penn will lose V-12 End Art Lit-| i "HaVEN—Linderman & Son, L, Linder- 


tleton, who starred against Navy,| man. cottons 
NEWPORT NEWS—Blechman’s, S. Biechman, 


but will be bolstered by the return | "CO oiaren's wear 





of the Rochester game with an in-| of the veteran guard, Ray Sten-| NEWPORT NEWS—La Vogue Shop, I. Spanier, 


coats, suits, dresses 


jury, may be able to play part/ oe] who has been hampered with o . 

time against Dartmouth at left g Pp NEW PHILADELPHIA, Ohio — Fischer's, L. 
end, but Jim Smith will start and 
appears to have won back his 0ld| pe the probable return of Bob Mos-|RICHMOND—Reliable Co.; I. Spanier, coats, 


injuries all season. Fischer, suits, dresses, sportswear. 
J NORTH ADAMS—Style Shoppe, 8S. Goldstein, 


Also on Penn's credit side will | “Suits dresses 


suits, dresses. 


job. Paul Walker is at the other|tertz, center, now recovered from an Gree. cums Mn © 
end, backed up by Howard Carroll. | the pulled tendon which kept him|_ Cramer. dresses mia 


| SPRINGFIELD—Beverly Shop, Mrs. A 


Howard, 
dresses 


every bit as good a job. Ernst and/ utes of action in the Navy game. |yincinia, Minn.—Quality Shop, M. Shaned- 
Rosenberger are the tackle re- 
By a coincidence, Fusilli weighs| serves. . 


ling. coats, dresses 
| WASHINGTON — Breslau’s, A. Sachs, coats, 


SQUAD TO FLY 1,650 MILES YANKTON S. D.—Jo-Ellen Shop, H. Margolin, 


--— coats, suits, dresses, sportswear, accessories. 





Arkwright, Inc., 128 W ist 
BALTIMORE — Brager-Eisenberg Co.; Miss I. 
Brosnan, handkerchiefs, neckwear 
BRISTOL, Conn.—Muzzy Bros.; Mrs. B. Mec- 
Cann, lingerie 
RENO, Nev., Oct. 31 (4%—A|cHICAGO—Wieboldt Stores, Inc.; Miss M. Fut- 
1,650-mile airplane flight will take SD aa Miss F. Ames, books, games, sta- 


the University of Nevada's foot-|DALLAS—Sanger Bros.; Mrs. B. Metzler, fur- 
niture: Miss L. Rawiins, art needlework 


Nevada Plays Service Eleven at 
Edmonton, Canada, Sunday 


¥ i 5 o Ed- ment dresses 
_ rd Mountains this week to Ed JOHNSTOWN, Pa.—Penn Traffic Co.; Miss H. 


monton, Canada, for a Sunday)" Rois. better’ dresses 
game with the Alaska Clippers, an|“ANSING-F. N. ae, Os B. Me- 
American Air Transport Command) prorta—Block & Kuhl Co.; W. Wheeler, 
| mdse. mgr., ready-to.wear 

eleven. PITTSBURGH — Boyds. Miss L. Rothschild, 


Edmonton sports fans, keen fol-| dresses; R. Barth, infants’, children’s wear; 
Miss S. Katz, toiletries, Jewelry, neckwear, 


> spo will be getting’| PITTSFIELD, Mass.—England Bros.; A. Mag- 
and tumble - ri B B ner, linens, domestics. blankets; F. Pill, dress 


one of their first glimpses of| (oous. silks, laces, ribbons, 


Aric foo in action | PROVIDENCE--Shepard Co.; W. B. Kay, drap- 
—— 7 . yy teams & t | eries: Miss M. Neville, junior coats, dresses 
on Canadian soli. 


| SALEM—Almy, Bigelow & Washburn; Miss J 
j Bach, women’s coats, suits, dresses. 

Not much is known about the) .yRACUSE_E W. Edwards & Son; Miss L. 
strength of the Clippers. The team|  Kasberger, better dresses; Miss I. Davis, 
; ‘ ; neckwear, handkerchiefs, r ns, notions, 
is made up of G. I. Joes serving laces, trimmings; Mrs. E. Meighen, toilet- 
with the Air Transport Command.| ries; Miss S. Jenkins, house dresses. 


; WATERBURY—Howland-Hughes Co.; Miss M. 

Nevada, on the other hand, will) "Pinnigan, ready-to-wear, sportswear; Miss M. 
fly to Edmonton with full strength.} Rowe, representing 

Varsity Coach Jim Aiken said em a ag ge rages A 
* ORE — Hutzler . 0.; 

twenty-two players would make Heise, gloves, neckwear; Mrs, M. Keuthe, R. 

the trip Mendelsohn, div. mdse. mgr.; Miss J. Tabak, 

sportswear: L. Getz, furs; Mrs. L. Mitzel, 

better coats; Miss J. Schoenfelder, women's 

ANOTHER FOE FOR HARVARD! dresses: Mrs, M. Aberts, asst.; Miss K. Clem- 

mer, misses’ dresses Miss J. Heineman, 

™ asst.: Miss D. Lo mag oa ig 3 é 

Stiller, men’s clothing; basement, Mrs. M. K. 

Boat School to Be) wie. sportswear underwear, corsets, house 

+a: dresses; Miss B. Kilberg, asst.; . Waldorf, 

Met on Gridiron Nov. 11 coats, suits 

-—— agesCe— Te uence. Sons ©. . a 

Miss Seltzer, millinery: 38 Morris- 

CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Oct. 31 (P) sey, larger women's, maternity Grosses; Bilan 

r - E. Albertini, junior sportswear; Miss Golob, 

—The Harvard Athletic Associa misses’ sport shop: E. Bertman, misses’ 

tion today announced that a sixth] coats; v Sullivan. coats: | Miss Pi Cohen. 

girls’ coats; sement, urnham, jobs, 

game had been arranged for its seconds, junior coats. dresses; Mrs. A. L 


undefeated informal football team.| Geary, ‘infants’ wear; Mrs. B. Boyd, silk, 


The Melville (R. 1.) PT Boat|s,oston-n un white Co.; Miss B. Meister. 


School will be met here in the} Silverware: J. Campagna, curtains, draperies; 

age Miss H. McGovern, neckwear, handkerchiefs, 
stadium Nov. 11. Yesterday the! pbiouses: Miss R Gontarski. handbags; Miss 

; j R. Thomson, women's underwear; Miss M. 
Crimson announced it would play Murray, infants’ wear: Miss H. McLaughlin, 
a return game with Tufts at Med-| house dresses; J. Shapiro, sportswear; J 
Bornstein, women’s, misses’ coats; Miss M. 





ford Nov. 18. Sprinzen junior wear Miss WN Pinick, 


The Harvard squad, which has) women's, misses’ better dresses; B. Schiak- 


I. Schiffer, sportswear; A. L. Breslow 


a homecoming contest Saturday|sume practice after a long layoff) wmamburg. shoes 


“INCINNATI—John Shillito Co A. L. Crowe 





night—away from home. The |on Friday. Such Navy V-12 stal-| toys: Mrs. H. D. Marks, lingerie, knit un- 


tween Washington and College 


game, juggled back and forth be-|warts as Bill Sweeney, a regular) derwear: Miss D. Ruef, sportswear; Miss D 


Wood, junior dresses; C. A. Friedman, asst 


| — . 7 : : 
tackle; Fred Garfield, Bill Regan spring mds., men’s furnishings; basement 


Miss M. M_ Richards, corsets; R. Beigel, 


|Park several times, will be played|and Bob Jurnick, guards; Center a : 

iz |at Griffith Stadium in the nation's|Jim Crane and Glenn Schultz, C aruhi, ‘girls, teen-age wear; Ly Steinberg, 
|capital. Dr. Clarence W. Spears, 

|Maryland coach, said Virginia 

|wanted to play at Washington. 


, ‘ boys’ wear: W. Savage, house dresses 
George O’Day and Marv Jenkins,| ((iV¥elanD—Wm. Taylor Son & Co. Miss 


backs, will be transferred to new! E. Strauss, E. Gresinger, piece goods: G. J 
Holcomb, div. mdse. mgr.; basement, Miss 


|training sites Nov. 6. M. Barker, millinery 


| BLOOMSBERG, Pa —Arcus’; Mrs. I, Fattman, 





i " - - . yr —_ man. women's, misses’ cheaper dresses: Miss 
ldefeated Tufts, Bates, Worcester) ¢“ovel. boys’ wear. F. Flynn, asst 7 oe 


wear. 
LOS ANGELES— l "3: children's snow suits, ski trousers 
GELES—Bullock’s; basement, Miss J./.,iDEN, Mass.—Sparks; D. Sparks, hosiery,| LAKEWOOD, Ohio—Bailey Co 


Sylvestre, coats, suits. 

MILWAUKEE—Milwaukee Boston Store: W. A 
— infants’ wear; Miss M. Parks, lin- 
gerie 

MINNEAPOLIS—Dayton Co.; A. McArthur, 
linens, domestics, bedding; Mrs. T. Bet- 
teridge, bridal shop 

RICHMOND—Thalhimer Bros.; Mrs. A. B. 
Thompson, div. mdse. mgr.: Miss E. Jeffreys. 
toilet goods: Miss B. Burton, hosiery; Mrs. 
H. Langdon, women's better coats, suits 
dresses; Mrs. E. Burbank, misses’ better 
coats, suits, dresses: Miss M. Brooks, cheaper 
coats: Miss I. Cox, cheaper dresses; J. C 
Watson. men's hats: Mrs. H. Hallet. acces- 
sories, smallwares: H. H. Lewis, men's fur- 
nishings; basement. Mrs. H. Huffer. house 
dresses, robes, uniforms; Mrs. H. Hallett, 
accessories; B. Perlin, ready-to-wear. 

SAN FRANCISCO—The Emporium: basement, 
Miss E. O'Rourke, gloves, umbrellas, hand- 
kerchiefs 

ST. LOUIS—Stix, Baer & Fuller Co.: Miss I. 
Zastrow, fine tewelry; Miss J. Boro, silk un- 
derwear: A. Zink. women’s coats, suits: B 
Goldstein, luggage. umbrellas; J. Weil, boys’ 
wear; J. Kohn, asst.; basement, Mr. Soule, 
Asst. men's wear; Miss M. Green, dresses, 

WORCESTER—Wm. Filene’s Sons Co.; A. J. 
Walkavich, basement infants’, boys, men's 
wear, shoes 

F. Atkins, 11 W. 424 


BALTIMORE—Hochschild, Kohn & Co.: Miss 
J. Freedman, inexpensive dresses; Mrs. Eig- 
enbrun, yard goods 

BOSTON—R. H. Stearns Co.; Miss H. Quinn, 
underwear: Miss R. Liston, furs 


| BUFFALO—Flint & Kent: C. Campbell, coats, 


suits: Miss Leddy, dresses, sportswear. 

CANTON, Ohio—Halle Bros.; Miss Carper, 
ready-to-wear 

CINCINNATI-—H. & S. Pogue Co.: Miss M 
Cummins basement, underwear house 
dresses, corsets; Miss C. Craig. jewelry. 

LOS ANGELES—J. W. Robinson Co.; Miss Fry, 
better coats, suits. 

ROCHESTER—Sibley. Lindsay & Curr: Miss 
K. Hartfelder. sportswear; Miss A. Lawler, 
gloves, hosiery 

Beldner & Landres, 450 7th Ave. 

HOLYOKE—Judy Shop: Mr. Bernstein, dresses 
underwear, accessories 

KEYSER, W. Va.—Shear’s: Miss Shear, coats, 
suits. dresses. sportswear 
ROANOKE. Va.—Natalie Shoppe; Mr. Spigel, 
coats, sults. dresses. accessories. underwear 

ROCKY MOUNT. N. C.—Vogue Dress Shop: 
Mr. Rabil, coats, suits, dresses, sportswear, 
underwear 

SPARTANBURG, 8S. C.—Standard Cloak Co.: 
Mr. Friedman, coats, suits: Mrs. Friedman, 
dresses. sportswear, accessories 

WASHINGTON—Marvin's Credit Store: Mr. 
Rappaport, coats, suits, dresses 

Cavendish Trading Corp., 1412 Bway. 

ASHEVILLE, N. C.—Ivey's, Inc: J. Swann, 
boys’ wear 

DAYTON—Elder & Johnston Co.: Miss E. Mac- 
Dole, junior, college shop: Miss A. Wertz, 
corsets; Miss Rosencranz, sportswear 


DAYTONA BEACH. Fla.—Yowell Drew Ivey 
Corp.; Miss E. Vinall. Mrs. M. Davis. piece 


goods, linens, draperies: Miss C. G. Echols, 
underwear. luggage. untforms. 

FORT WAYNE, Ind.—Wolf & Dessauer Co.: 
Miss H. Cusick, junior shop; Miss M. Scheffer 
blouses, skirts ‘ 

LOUISVILLE—Stewart D. G. Co.: Miss F. Gas- 
silly, toys; Miss A. Shallcross. books: Miss 
D. Holland, coats, suits: G. T. Cummins, 
luggage, rugs: F. C. Moore, mdse. mgr., home 

of Louie 

S—Scruges, Vandervoort & Barne 
Co.; R. L. Slater. mdse. mgr.. first floor. 

WASHINGTON—Lansburgh & Bros. Co: W. 
Rogers, mdse. mgr., ready-to-wear: Miss E 
Rawlings, infants’ wear Miss E. Reuhl 
girls’, teens’ wear: Mrs. M. L. Ramsey. 
gloves: H. J. Meyers. mdse. mer., home fur- 


nishings; Mrs. M. Hass, hosiery: Miss G. F.| 


a better coats: S. Beck, basement under- 
ar. 


YOUNGSTOWN — Strouss-Hirshberg Co Miss | 


Tighe, misses’. women's dresses Miss 
DeSanta. millinery : 


aaa W. & B. Cohen, 450 7th Ave. 
\ GIRARDEAU, Mo.—Buckner-R 
Co Mi Lampkin, spring feaieteee 
CHARLESTON, Mo.—Buckner-Ragsdale Co.; 
Mr. Ragsdale, spring ready-to-wear , 
DETROIT—Carson’s, J. Sallen, spring suits. 
FAYETTEVILLE, Ark.—Campbell & Bell D. G. 
GRAND ISLaNt "Mo Colton 
, 0.—Colton’s; 
onan cen aie “eek ee 
. Fla.—Anderson’s Dept. 4 
HELENA ee, rine read . iB en 
° rk.—Vanette Shop; . 
spring ‘suits. oe 
JOLIET, Ill.—Anderson’s Ready to Wear: A 
Anderson. spring ready-to-wear. ; ; 
MILWAUKEE—Heim's: Heim, spring suits 
OAK PARK, Ill.—Benton’s; M. Liebson, spring 
ready-to-wear 


PHILADELPHIA—Cookie’s; B. Freedman, fall | 


coats 
PITTSBURG, Kan.—Seymour D. G. Co.: H. 
Seymour, spring coats. suits. 
SIKESTON. Mo.—Buckner-Ragsdale Co.: Mr 
Lough spring ready-to-wear 
WASHINGTON—Wailace, Inc: R Wallace, 
biouses, fall, spring ready-to-wear 
Consolidated Retail Stores, 498 7th Ave. 
BALTIMORE — Bonwit-Lennon Co.: Mrs. R 
CORPUS Career smallwares 

. Tex.—Randall's; . 
Duckworth, dresses. a ee. e 
FORT WAYNE, Ind.—Patterson-Fletcher Co.; 
L. Ward, mdse. mgr 
KALAMAZOO, Mich.—J. R. Jones; Mr. Bab- 
SAN ANTONIONV: 

. N Vogue; Miss Exum, dresses. 

WASHINGTON—Phifiipsborn's: J. Goldstein, 
mdse. mgr. 

Fernfield Associates, 505 8th Ave. 
BUFFALO—I. Goldin, Inc.; J. Chertoff, ready- 
to-wear. 
CHICAGO—Marcay’s: Mr. Levine, ready-to- 

ar. 

LAFAYETTE, Ind.—Fashion Shop: Mr. Fried- 
berg, ready-to-wear 
LOCK HAVEN, Pa.—Smart Shop S. Pete, 
ready-to-wear 


| PAWTUCKET —Peerless Co W. Kolb, ready- 


to- wear 


ready-to-wear 


STERLING, Il.—Sterling Fashion; Mr. Wein- | 


stein. ready-to-wear 


WORCESTER—Louise Shop; Mrs. Rody, ready- 


to-wear 
YORK, Pa.—Leed’s: A. Mandel, ready-to-wear 
HM. Hacker & Co., 225 W. Mth 
CHAMBERSBURG. Pa. — Tobey's; Mrs c 
Tobey, ready-to-wear 
LANSFORD, Pa.—Leon's; L. Miller, ready-to- 


wear 
NANTICOKE, Pa.—B. Lazarowitz, ready-to- 
wear 

NAZARETH. Pa.—Herman’s; H. Bloom, ready- 
to-wea 


A. | PROVIDENCE, R. I.—Outlet Co.: E. R. Crozat inoleums: 3 “ 


~—Smart Shop: A. Pete, | 


chenille housecoats, holiday lingerie. | coats, sportswear 
NEW HAVEN—Beveriey's; Mr. Betzes, hosiery, | PITTSBURGH—Rosenbaum 
chenille housecoats, holiday lingerie | boys’ clot? Simps 
NORTHAMPTON, Pa. — Lerner’s; C. Lerner, | PITTSBURGH—Frank & S 
piece goods. domestics, curtains. draperies | men’s, boys’ wea r 
PHILADELPHIA—Charming Shoppe; M. Side- | boys’ wear; furnishings 

water, children’s underwear | sportswear; %. Franklin 
PHILADELPHIA—Morris Zeiger, children's un- 
derwear Syndicate-Alliance, 50 


PHILADELPHIA—Miss New Yorker Shop: M.! sosTon- ndler 
Herskpwitz, hosiery, chenille housecoats, holi- | ag a 
day lin erie : F dresses: Miss E. S. Smit 

WASHINGTON, N. J.—H. A. Cohen's Sons; R Flaherty. women’s be 
Cohen, hosiery, holiday lingerie, chenille) yeenroy suits. sports 
housecoats CLEVELAND—Higbee 

Kirby, Block & Co., 128 W. ist handbags. jfeweirs 


BALTIMORE—Hecht Bros.; R. O. Dodge, dra-| '"&. furnishings 
peries; P. J. Frank, house furnishings: A misses. women's 
uggiero, infants’ furniture; J. Hoffman. ra- Infants’ wear; W 
dios; S. Markow boys’ wear; M. B. Shapiro, uniforms — 
men’s clothing: Miss D. Raymond, juntor-| FALL RIVER, Mass —r 
miss wear: Misa R. Morris, underwear | Kosi floor eo ; 

BALTIMORE — Hecht's Reliable; B. Snyder Brown. linens, dome 
men’s wear; S. Sollod, boys’ wear; Miss M. | HARTFORD-—Sage-All 
Foertsch, domestics; W. Lurie, coats; Miss men's furnishings 
S. Gross, underwear clothing: C. Kellne 

JOHNSTOWN, Pa.—Glosser Bros.; P. H. Ben-| LANCASTER. Pa.—Hager . 
nis, women’s coats, sults G. McGovern, underwear 

NASHVILLE—Harvey’s, Inc.; Miss J. Saywell,| . Dert. cosmetics 
women's dresses | MERIDEN. Conn.—t 

NORFOLK—Altschul’s, Inc.; Miss E. Harris,|  Teady-to-wear 
accessories, smallwares Miss 1. Geffen,| MIDDLETOWN. Conn - 
spring ready-to-wear; Miss E. Stein, mil-/ Mrs. H. B. Com 
linery Pukel. corsets 

WASHINGTON—Hecht Co.: H. Goodbinder. ra~-| NEW BEDFORD. Mass 
dios; Miss B. C. Brady, underwear: I. Boo-| Co; LH. Haskell 
ner. men’s furnishings: B. Rose, boys’ wear; | PAWTUCKET, R_ I 
L. Etelson, cheaper dresses; Mrs. H. Stearns, | Valiquette. handbag 
lamps: S. Smith, draperies; Miss A. Garber Mrs. M. Studley ‘ 
cheaper coats; Miss D. Holah, junior-miss| Miss E. N. Macallum 
wear; Miss H. Scofield, girls’ wear: M. Sprin-| Miss K. Swanson, glov 
ger, boys’ furnishings; H. Schattman, lug- . 
gage; P. Parsonese. finens Cc. R. Nix, rugs C. Weill, Inc 
W. J. McCaw. men’s clothing: L. Mushinsky.| BRADFORD. Pas —A 
toys: W. Warsaw, house furnishings: base- Harriett. lingerie 
ment, Mrs. M. Rosenberg, millinery; Miss A K. Benson. ready-t 
Pinkus, dresses; Miss A. Anderson, sports-| CLEVELAND—Stearn « 
wear. ter dresses Miss 

1. C. Krewson Corp., 225 W. 34th. robes 


BOGALUSA, La.—J. Goldman, women’s ready- BAST EIVERPOOL. 

to wear, mdse. mgr enhen hatken 2 
FARGO, N. D.—C. J. deLendrecie Co.; Miss} chidrens 

Thorsen. ready-to-wear wear. accessories 
GADSDEN. Ala.—Frank Duncan Dept. Store; | qouSsTON—Satomite 

Mrs. F. Duncan, mdse. mgr mer.: J. Ha pi 
GRANVILLE, N. Y.—M. Ginsburg & Son; J.| INDIANAPOLIs—t . 

Ginsberg, men's wear, house furnishings; Miss Riggs, neckwear t 

Foster, ready-to-wear mgr., ready-to-wear 
HIGH POINT, N. C.—Harllee’s, Inc.: Mr. Wall,| tionery, books. came 

men's. boys’ wear, house furnishings |LINCOLN. Neb.—Gold 
LOS ANGELES—Thrifty Drug Stores; R. C rich. women’s coats 

Alexander. baby socks wear Miss H Cox 
MIDDLETOWN, N. Y.—Carson & Towner; Miss; junior dresses: 4 

T. Stanwood, ready-to-wear drug sundries; T. C 
STAUNTON, Va.—Kaufman's; Mr. Kaufman,| mer 

ready-to-wear | SIOUX CITY — Davidson B 
UNIONTOWN Pa.—Leonard’s; Mr Cohen, | men's. boys’ wear 

ready-to-wear WASHINGTON Kanr 

L. Levitan, 450 7th Ave Jaffee. women's, misses’ bett 

BRADDOCK, Pa.—Levin's; H. Levine, dresses, Yahr-Donen Corp., 225 


coats. ’ 
DETROIT—Davidson Bros.; $. Lenhoff, Miss|4SBURY PARK—Berger's 


Neva. dresses “AG " : 
McKEESPORT, Pa.—Katzman’s; Miss Katzman, | “4!CAGO—Pollyanna SI 








dresses CHICAGO—Mayson’s: Mr 
PROVIDENCE—-Pinkereon Co.; Miss Hamer, | OTTAWA yey 

resses : 7m ' 
UTICA--Ritz Apparel; Mr. Plotka, coats | micrnec Dt i—H tet 
WILKES-BARRE—Melvin's; Mr, Shapiro, coats, | soort atti 

suits swear 

F. Lilienthal & Co., Inc., 6 W. 35th 

BRADDOCK, Pa.—Famous; W. P. Kuhns, men’s |AKRON-M. O'Neil C ase 
clothing, trunks, boys’ wear lew? junior dresses: 1440 Bwa 
CHESTER. Pa.—Speare Bros.; Miss FE. Glatts, | BALTIMORE—Schieisner 

silk lingerie; Miss M. Attig, sportswear: Misg| CC*D dresses ats. 

P. Loughead, children’s dresses: Miss V - = sportswear; 225 

Harris, housedresses, millinery; Miss V. Duck- | «7°: 

worth, dresses: G. Levy. dry goods CAARLEROL Pa 
CHICAGO—Goldblatt’s Gold Bond Dept. Store: | cfica cy 

F. A. Rheinstein, piece goods, curtains, linens, | Susheaum hette 
| . domestics CLEVELAND 


UNCLASSIFIE! 


dresses 2 
—Giobe 


* 


sportswear, neckwear, coats, furs Ost Tig 
WALTHAM—Parke Snow, Inc.; M. H. O’Con-| Emrheim. corset 
nor. domestics, silks “LEVELAND—1 
YORK—Bon Ton: Mrs. M. Detwiler, coats iaonmeed a — 

sults, dresses, raincoats | dresses: 1441 Bway Ene 

Arthur E. Littman, Inc., 101 W. 37th = | CLIFTON FORGE, Va —Ca 

BUFFALO—Sample Shop; Mrs. M. Dean, wo- |CLOVIS. N pee! del 
men’s dresses Co.; A. Vohs, gen. mdse 
prrts FIELD—Tentile Store; D. Kay, coats,| Vickery Co). 
suits, dresses FAIRBURY. Neb— Sr 
TROY—Denby's; Miss L. Stein, coats, suits, oo Fea ee 
urs , =" 
WHEELING, W. Va.—Horne’s; M. L. Horne, | "{5)'WLLE. 5. C—M. Thomas 
coats, sults: Miss S. West, dresses GRAND RAPIDS—M L. & 
WILMINGTON, Del.—Arthur’s Apparel: T Fishman, men’s, : 

Tuckerman, coats, suits; N. Koonfz, lingerie, 450 7th Ave. (B 

smallwares. HARTFORD—Betty 

Marizon & Rosenberg, 225 W. Mth ready-to-wear 

BROOKLINE, Mass.—Cyreld Shop: Mrs. A. | MILWAUKEE—G 
| Spiller, ready-to-wear wash goods. si 

CHARLESTON. S. C.—Gossard Shop: Mrs E. Snow. wom 

onniteriin. ready-to-wear pudget Crosses 
| COLUMBS, Ga.—Jorene’s; Mr: fy; re -to- <a 

ane : s. Ray: ready-to- | .onroLK—Pontifix’s 

EVANSVILLE, Ind.—The Wells; Mrs. Wells,| _t0-wear. piece goods 

ready-to-wear. | PITTSEURGH—Kaufm 
KITTANNING, Pa.—Maxim’s; Mrs. Swartz,| Wagner. epicure 

ready-to-wear. mgr.: Miss B. Lep 

PULASKI. Va.—Raflo’s; Mr. Raflo, ready-to- | PITTSBURGH—Gir 

wear Conna, boys’ f 
SAVANNAH—Lesser's; Mrs. Dickstein, ready-| Enelisdorf, 

to- wear Miss K. L 
WASHINGTON—Rochel's; Mr. Reichelle, ready-| Klages. asst . 

to-wear haberdashery. shirts, 

McGreevey, Werring & Howell, 225 W. 44th | SiAms0n. women's, n x 
BLOOMINGTON, Ind.—Breeden & Co.: Miss lins, blankets, beadspread M K 
A. C. Harvey, ready-to-wear: C. A. Breeden, umbrellas. neckwear andkerch 
gen. mdse C. B. McKee, asst.; S. Bear 

CAMBRIDGE. Mass.—J. H. Corcoran & Co.; wear: 116 W. 32d 

Mrs D. Wood, ready-to-wear ROANOKE—Lazarus Inc 
CINCINNATS—Sehert s, Inc.; J. Eckert, gen | ready-to-wear, millinery 

mdse Saul 

MIDDLETOWN, Ohio—Central Store: Miss M ler vovls—R yd Richardsor 
Dovelon, dresses; A. V. Vickers, smallwares dresses: 1457 Bwa Ww 

F. W. Mouery, mdse. mgr |}SAN FRANCISCO—D. M 
SPRINGFIELD—Albert Steiger Co.; R. R. Dar-| Sheldon. furs: 370 7tt 

den, domestics, draperies 1SUNBURY. Pa. —Phil F 
| WARREN, Ohio—Warner Co.; H. D. Mouery.|> w. 34 } Braunstet: 
| ren mdse ‘AS NGTON r 
| WASHINGTON—Kaufman's Miss A. Hoffman bar ~ ns s, ~ . 

dresses WHEELING—MIll Rer 

Corinne L. Meyer, 1441 Bway berg. rayon, cott 

ARLINGTON Va.—Adrian’s Mi Austin Ave. (Buying & Resear 
ready-to-wear 
ASHLAND, Ky.—Lyda Ellis, ready-to-wea timate meat, tee 
BEAVER FALLS, Pa.—Venger's: Mrs. Gordon, | OD TROIT—Edson. M 
ready-to-wear nosiery, sweaters; 4 ¥ 
MANCHESTER, Conn.—Fradin's; Mr. Blair tributors 

ready-to-wear NEW : OF LEANS 
PIMLICO, Md.—Wurzburger’s; Mr. Wurzbur-| 2 Davis ur 

ger. ready-to-wear porratnin een . 

, ok =~ *.as 
Mutual Buying Syndicate, 11 W. 424 Prince, housewares. toys: Liz 

BUFFALC—J. N. Adam & Co J. C. Fiynn, |TERRE HAUTE—Levir B 
mdse. ingr., women’s outer apparel; Miss J notions. Christmas novelt 
Guyette, budget dresses 70 Worth (A. V. Keller 





Li 





STUDEBAKER PROFIT 
PUT AT $2,947,284 


Earnings for the First Nine 
Months the Equivalent 
of $1.27 a Share 


Net sales of the Studebaker Cor- 
poration for the first nine months 
of 1944 set a new high record of} 
$317,150,233, comparing with a pre- 
vious high of $262,534,622 in the 
1943 period, including charges to 
the United States Government un-| 
der cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts. | 
For the third quarter sales were | 
$101,964,469, comparing with $106,-| 


683,472 in the preceding quarter! 


and with $101,897,344 in the third | 
quarter of 1943. } 

Net profit amounted to $2,947,-| 
284 for the nine months after) 
$9,857,000 Federal taxes on income 
and $1,125,000 provision for con- 
tract termination and post-war re- 
conversion contingencies, equal to 
$1.27 a share on 2,320,481 capital 
shares. This compares with $2,552,- 
084 after $9,380.000 taxes and! 
$1,200,000 contingency provisions 
in nine months of 1943, equal to 
$1.14 a share on 2,223,266 common 
shares. 


For the third quarter net profit} was formerly with the Delco appli-| 


was $1,214,511, or 52 cents a share, 
against $914,226, or 39 cents a) 
share, in the previous quarter and 
$879,985, or 39 cents a share, in 
the third quarter of 1943. Profits 
for 1944 are subject to war-con- 
tract renegotiations. 

Net working capital at Sept. 30 
was $26,378,879, against $23,039,- 
768 a year before. Cash amounted 
to $35,840,952 and current Labili- 
ties included $32,000,000 Regula- 
tion VT borrowings from banks. 
Earned surplus was $14,377,184, 
comparing with $10,841,151 on} 
Sept. 30, 1943. 





OTHER CORPORATE REPORTS 
American Steel Foundries—Year 
to Sept. 30: Net income, after 
$9,978.000 taxes, was $2,675,383, 
equal to $2.25 a common share, 
against $2,752,543, or $2.32 a 
common share, after $14,850,200 
taxes, for preceding fiscal year. 


Barber Asphalt Corporation—Nine 
months to Sept. 30: Net profit, 
$604,298, equal to $1.55 a share, 
against $407,434, or $1.04 a 
share, last year. September 
quarter: Net profit, $230,589, or 
59 cents a share, compared with 
$130,404, or 33 cents a share, 
last year. 


Blaw-Knox Company and Subsidi- 
aries—-Nine months: Net profit, 
$1,390,113 or $1.04 a share on 1,- 
334,458 shares outstanding, 
against $1,153,132 or 86 cents 
each on 1,331,443 shares, last 
year. September quarter net prof- 
it, $524,314 or 39 cents a share, 
compared with $372,404 or 28 
cents a share for third quarter 
of 1943. 

Bridgeport Brass Company, Ex- 
cluding Unconsolidated Subsidi- 
ary—Nine months: Net profit, 

748,087, or 71 cents a common 
share, against $1,099,880, or| 
$1.07 a share, iast year. 


Calumet & Hecla Consolidated 
Copper Company—Nine months: 
Net profit, $1,072,137, or 53 
cents a share, against $1,166,207, 
or 58 cents a share, last year. 


Century Ribbon Millis, Inc.—Nine 
months: Net profit, $158,123, or 
$1.38 a share, against $123,812, 
or $1.01 a common share, last 
year. 


Cleveland Graphite Bronze Com- 

* pany—Nine months: Net profit, | 
$1,418,492, or $4.09 a common 
share, against $1,299,070, or $3.70 
a share, last year. 


Cuneo Press, Inc., and Wholly 
Owned Subsidiaries Nine 
months: Net profit, $1,088,473, 
or $2.86 a common share, against 
$834,757, or $2.15 a share, last 
year. 

Davison Chemical Corporation ana 
Subsidiaries —- September quar- 
ter: Net profit, $226,097 or 44 
cents a share, against $274,186) 
or 53 cents a share for Septem- 
ber quarter a year ago; net sales, 
$5,637,079 against $5,132,255. 

Flintkote Company—Forty weeks 
to Oct. 7: Net income, $1,159,163, 
equal to $1.09 a share, compared | 
with $874,080 or $1.04 a share, 
for 1943 period; net sales, $28,- 
717,532 compared with $23,368,- 
013. 

General Printing Ink Corporation 
—Nine months: Net profit,| 
$419,549 or 37 cents a common| 
share, against $418,913 or 36| 
cents a share, last year. 

General Refractories Company— 
Nine months: Net profit, $171,- 
870, or 36 cents a share, against 
$563,736, or $1.20 a share, last! 
year. September quarter: Net) 
loss, $46,507, contrasted with net} 
profit of $190,634, or 41 cents a} 
share, for third quarter of 1943. 

Hershey Chocolate Corporation— 
September quarter: Net profit, 
$1,227,721, or $1.32 a common 
share, against $1,477,797, or| 
$1.69 a share, for similar quar-| 
ter a year ago. 

Household Finance Corporation: 
Nine months: Net profit, $3,540,- 


| 
| 


FINANCIAL 


To Manage Advertising 


Of Westinghouse Radios 


Georges Faurie . 
Blakeslee-Lane 


Appointmen 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER Il, 1944. 


CENTERS PROGRAM 
UPON DISTRIBUTION 


Continental Industries Plans 
Motorless Vacuum Cleaner, 
Possible Drug Field Entry 


Distribution problems in the 
post-war period, regarded as para- 
mount by officials of companies 
affiliated with Continental Indus- 
tries, Inc., will be a major con- 
sideration of the post-war prod- 
ucts and developments committee 
appointed yesterday at the close of 
a two-day meeting of the group at 
its headquarters here.. The com- 
mittee is composed of Joseph F. 
Clark, chairman, associated with 
the parent organization; Robert S. 
Holding, president of Franklin 
Machine and Foundry Company, 
Providence, an affiliate, and Ches- 
ter A. Bolles, chairman of Conti- 
nental. 

Production plans for post-war 
are being worked out for the 


t of Georges Faurie|twelve small and medium sized or- 


as manager of the advertising and|s@nizations wholly owned by Con- 
sales promotion for the newly cre-|tinental, which will do a $75,000,- 


ated radoi receiver division of 
Westinghouse Electric and Manu- 
facturing Company was announced 
yesterday by Harold B. Donley, 
manager of the division. Mr. Faurie 


ance division of General Motors. 





solidated net income, $652,170, 
against $659,201 earned last 
year. Twelve months to Sept. 30: 
Consolidated net income, $650,- 
811 against $634,232 for 12 
months to Sept. 30, 1943. 


Pleasant Valley Wine Company— 
Year to Aug. 31: Net profit, 
$65,684, or 26 cents a share, 
against $75,412, or 30 cents a 
share, for previous fiscal yeanm 


Revere Copper & Brass, Inc.—Nine 
months: Net profit, after $695,- 
000 contingency reserve and 
$10,840,000 Federal tax pro- 
vision, was $1,262,048, equal to 
61 cents a common share. This 
compares with net profit of $1,- 
270,907 or 62 cents a common 
share, last year, when $1,000,000 


was provided for contingencies} qyctin 


and $12,600,000 for taxes. 


Ritter Company, 


| 





000 business this year, Mr. Bolles 
said, with details to be announced 
as soon as decisions for individual 
companies are reached. He em- 
phasized, however, that the first 
“post-war” introduction will be a 
motorless vacuum cleaner, which 
will make its appearance before 
the end of the war with Germany. 
This will be possible, he explained, 
due to the fact that it is con- 
structed principally of aluminum. 

Continental, while not divulging 
its further expansion plans, is con- 
sidering entering the food, drug 
and cosmetics fields. It also was 
learned that the two new affiliates 
will join the group in the near 
future. 

The major initial post-war offer- 
ing will be washing machines, of 
which the organization will offer a 
complete range. Mr. Bolles said 
that the backlog of consumer de- 
mands for washers is ‘“tremen- 
dous.” He looks for normal pre- 
war distribution to increase from 
some two million units to almost 
four million annually. 

Individual companies are con- 
g surveys on post-war pro- 
duction, Mr. Bolles explained, but 


Inc. — Nine|these studies are being coordinated 


months: Net income, $268,556 or|to work into the over-all picture of 
$1.30 a share, against $330,467 | affiliated concerns, so that produc- 
or $1.71 a share, last year. Sep-|tion can be channeled to the benefit 
tember quarter net income, $85,-|of all. In many instances produc- 
177 or 40 cents a common share, |tion contracts will be let for parts 
against $97,261 or 48 cents a/to one or more affiliated companies 
common share for third quarter| by the principal producer. 


of 1943. 


Rome Cable Corporatio 
months to Sept. 30: Net profit, 
after $1,147,300 taxes, was $258,- 
622, or $1.36 a share, against 
$301,043, or $1.58 a share, after 
$793,660 taxes for six months to 
Sept. 30, 1943. September quar- 
ter: Net, $132,652, or 70 cents a 
share, compared with $175,129, 
or 92 cents a share for Septem- 
ber quarter a year ago. 

Semler (R. B.), Inc.—Nine months: 
Net profit, $425,017 or $1.06 each 
on 400,000 common shares on 
sales of $4,454,492. 


Smith (A. 0.) Corporation and|®% 


Wholly Owned Subsidiaries— 
Year to July 31: Net income, 
after $31,817,500 taxes, was 
$6,407,283, 
against $5,633,723, or $11.29 a 
share, for previous fiscal year, 
when $50,217,400 was provided 
for taxes, $4,000,000 for estimat- 
ed renegotiation and $1,850,000 
for post-war adjustment and 
other contingencies. Net sales 
were $178,112,593, against $173,- 
268,447. 


Stone & Webster, Inc., and Sub- 
sidiaries—-Nine months: Net in- 
come, $1,399,516, against $1,160,- 
661, last year. Twelve months to 
Sept. 30: Net income, $1,972,197 
compared with $2,028,698 for 12 
months to Sept. 30, 1943. 


United Paperboard Company and 
Subsidiaries: Quarter to Aug. 31: 
Net profit, $51,832, or 16 cents 
a common share, against $25,- 
633, or 5 cents a share, for Au- 
gust quarter a year ago. 


United States Industrial Chemi- 
cals, Inc.—September quarter: 





or $12.84 a share,|°%! 


Post-war selling will be mainly 


ape Six | through individual companies, but 


where one or more organizations 
can use a single sales force, he 
said, the single unit will be used. 
In short, every effort will be made 
to cut all costs to the point where 
continental companies can compete 
freely. 


Business World 


WHOLESALE COMMODITY PRICES 

U. 8. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
August, 1939100 

Im- Domes- 
port. 
(11) 
168.7 
168.7 
168.7 
168.7 
168.7 
168.7 


Food- Indus- 
tic. Farm. stuffs. trial 
(17) (7) (12) (16) 
193.4 225.3 2085 166.3 
193.6 225.7 208.7 166.3 
193.3 225.0 208.4 166.3 
193.4 225.2 208.5 166.3 
194.4 225.3 208.5 166.3 
; 193.0 224.2 208.0 166.2 
1....182.8 168.7 192.4 222.9 207.1 166.2 


Oct. 30 178.3 168.0 185.4 214.7 2041 161.0 
The index is based on spot market prices 
Most of the twenty-eight commodities are basic 
raw materials 
+ * 


= 
Buyers’ Arrivals Rise 

The total number of visiting buy- 
ers registered in the New York 
market for the month of October 
was 6,429 against 5,112 for the 
samc month last year, an increase 
of 25.7 per cent. Buyers for the 
week ended yesterday numbered 
1,561 compared with 1,391 last 
week and 1,268 for the similar pe- 
riod a year ago, according to 
lists published in THE NEW YORK 
TIMES. Yesterday’s arrivals to- 
taled 817 against 904 last Tuesday. 

2 # 

Twill Makers in Tent Program 

A War Production Board direc- 
tive for conversion of fixed per- 
centages of looms on herringbone 
twills to tent twills is contemplated 
chiefly for the purpose of bringing 


Index 
(28) 
183.3 
183.4 
. -183.3 
.- 183.3 
- 183.3 
- 183.1 


1944 
Oct. 24 
t 


Net income, $417,325, equal to smaller producers into the pro- 
$1.10 each on 376,836 capital|8™@™, according to Worth Street 


shares, against $519,898 or $1.38] 


sources yesterday. Principal pro- 


a share for third quarter of 1943,|4ucers have volunteered to assist 


Six months to Sept. 30: net in-| and already have converted sub-| 
come, $848,945 or $2.25 a share, | 8tantial portions of their loom ca- | 


against $943,826 or $2.50 a sharepPcity, it was indicated. 


for similar period a year ago; 
net sales, $21,243,257 compared 
with $18,313,420. 


Webster-Eisenlohr, Inc. — Nine 
months: Net income, $495,544, 
or $1.20 a common share, against 
$419,422, or $1.01 a common 
share, last year. September 
quarter: Net, $125,500, or 30 
cents a common share, against 
$122,749, or 29 cents a share of 
common for third quarter of 
1943. Share earnings on com- 
mon are after dividend require-| 
ments on preferred stock re-| 
deemed Aug. 1 last. 


BUSINESS NOTES 


Walter A. Bowe, formerly adver- 
tising and sales promotion man- 
ager of Carrier Corporation, has 


305, or $3.97 a common share,|joined Walter Dorwin Teague, in- 
against $3,420,191, or $3.80 al\dustrial designer, as an associate 


common share, last year. 


National Cylinder Gas Company 
and Wholly Owned Domestic 
Subsidiaries—Nine months: Net} 
profit, $1,178,423 or 87 cents a/| 
share of common, against $1,- 
617,679 or $1.21 a common share, | 
last year: net sales, $19,081,948) 
compared with $20,120,642. Com-! 
mon share earnings this year are} 
after dividend requirments on) 
preferred stock issued during the 
period. 

National Tea Company — Forty 
weeks to Oct. 7: Net profit, aft- 
er $125,000 inventory reserve 
and $320,000 Federal income 
tax, was $443,101, or 61 cents a 
common share, against net of 
$86,643, or 4 cents a share, after) 
$60,000 tax charges for the forty 
weeks’ period of 1943. 

Pfizer (Chas.) & Co., Inc.—Nine| 
months: Net income, $1,589,122, 
equal to $3.17 a share, against 


| 


in industrial planning and g¢on- 
sultant on sales problems. 

Carl M. Snyder, formerly direc- 
tor of food and entertainment for 
the Hotel New Yorker, has been 
named assistant to the president, | 
Frank L. Andrews, 


Mrs. Mildred B. Strohm, former-| 
ly associate manager of the supply | 
department at Bamberger’s, has 
been named acting manager of that 
department at Macy’s and Bam- 
berger’s to succeed Robert M. Cal- 
vin, who has been appointed asso- 
ciate manager of the small leather 
goods department at Macy’s. 

Harry R. Showers, formerly as- 
sistant sales promotion manager 
for Standard Brands, Inc., has been 


named assistant sales manager for | 





* * * 

Clothing Demands Hold High 

Continued strong demand for 
men’s lines of spring clothing, is 
holding, according to manufactur- 
ers, who stated pressure for com- 
mitments is as strong or stronger 
than was the case a week ago when 
the lines were first shown. Retail- 
ers, it is pointed out, believe win- 
ter stocks will be even more de- 
pleted than was the case a year 
ago, and as a result are anxious to 
get maximum coverage on the new 
lines so that inventories may be 
built up as soon as possible. 


Goodrich Expanding in South 

AKRON, Ohio, Oct. 31 (4)—The 
B. F. Goodrich Company reported 
today plans for expansion of plant 
nd manufacturing facilities of its 


Clarksville, Tenn., division at a cost 
exceeding $500,000. The Virginia 





John Hudson Moore, Inc. 

The New York Raincoat Manu-| 
facturers Association, Inc., will! 
tender a dinner in honor of its) 


. . A | 
president, Simon Cohen, at the} 


$1,345,046 or $2.69 a share, last| Waldorf-Astoria Hotel on Nov, 16.}| 





year. Estimated provision for| 
taxes, were $4,260,600 compared | 
with $2,331,000. Sales rose to} 
new high of $18,106,138 from 
$11,877,536 for 1943 period. 
Philadelphia Dairy Products Com- 
pany, Inc.——Nine months Con- 


Harry E. Hall has been appointed 
manager of the railroad sales de- 
partment of the Shell Oil Com- 
pany, Inc., to succeed J. 8S. Sawyer, 
who has been transferred to the 
asphalt sales department as man- 
ager. 


Bridge Company of Roanoke re- 
ceived the contract for steel. The 
general construction contract will 
be awarded by Dec. 1. 


Auctioneers Notice 


MODERN 
MACHINERY 


LOCATED AT 
601 39 St. (Cor. 6 Ave.) B’klyn, N. Y. 


Will Be Sold at Public Auction 


THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 
2nd, at 11 A. M. 

CONSISTING AS FOLLOWS: 
MILLERS, LATHES, RADIAL 
DRILLS, TURRET LATHES, SHAP- 
ERS, GRINDERS, AUTOMATICS, 
BORING MILLS, BRAKES, DRILL 
PRESSES, POWER PRESSES, SHEARS 


MISCELLANEOUS 


And Hundreds of Items Too 
to Mention 





Numerous 


We have many other Machines 
not listed here 


Bernard Magrill, Auct’r. 


Off. 45 Bway, B’kiyn 11. N. Y. 
Phone STagg 2-4574-5 


Advertising N 


A cooperative post-war advertis- 
ing campaign to stimulate a trend 
toward increased home ownership 
is being considered by advertising 
managers of home appliance and 
equipment manufacturers, it was 
learned yesterday. Asserting that 
studies have shown that home 
owners present a more stable and 
wider market for such merchandise 
than “leasees,” one advertising 
manager stated that some large 
companies are convinced that the 
pre-war downward trend in home 
ownership must be reversed if a 
market wide enough to absorb ex- 
panded production is to be 
achieved. 

The campaign, “which would be 
to each manufacturer’s selfish in- 
terest,” he added, would have its 
policy determined by a “rump com- 
mittee” of the manufacturers 
which would act in a capacity 
similar to the War Advertising 
Council. 


Account 


M. H. Hackett Company has re- 
signed from the account of the 
Anchor Hocking Glass Corporation, 
effective Jan. 1, 1945. 


Personnel 


John Simonds, formerly with 
McCann-Erickson, Inc., has joined 


PAPERBOARD OUTPUT OFF 


4.1% Decline Reported in Week 
Compared With Year Ago 


Paperboard production last week 
was 4.1 per cent below the year 
before, the National Paperboard 
Association reported yesterday. 
New orders increased 1.1 per cent 
and unfilled orders were down 17.1 
per cent. Mills operated at 94 per 
cent capacity. 

The following table gives the 
weekly statistics in tons as sup- 
plied by the National Paperboard 


Association: 


————- Weeks Ended 

Oct .28,1944.Oct.21,1944.Oct.30,1943 
Production . 137,806 156,269 143,686 
New orders......146,003 133,028 144,415 
Unfilled orders. .486,882 499,929 587,324 


Production declined more than 
seasonally and the adjusted index 


| 
} 


31, and Wednesday, 





HERMAN 


ews and Notes 


the sales promotion department of 
Interchemical Corporation. 

Franziska Schacht, formerly 
with Bloomingdale Brothers, Inc., 
has joined the advertising depart- 
ment of American Viscose Corpo- 
ration. 

David Grant, formerly with 
Ruthrauff & Ryan, Inc., has joined 
the radio department of McCann- 
Erickson, Inc. 


Vera Cassidy Ash has joined the 
radio department of the Washing- 
ton office of JY M. Hickerson, Inc, 

Harold L, Elfenbein, a captain in 
the United States Army on inac- 
tive status, has *joined the S-M 
News Company as assistant sales 
promotion manager. 


Ben Morris has been appointed 
promotion manager for Electronic 
Industries, and Radio and Televi- 
sion Retailing. ‘ 


Notes 


Richard S. Chenault, art direc- 
tor of Fuller & Smith & Ross, Inc., 
New York, has been appointed in- 
structor of advertising layout at 
the Extension School of Columbia 
University for the 1944-45 term. 


The Advertising Men and Wo- 
men for Rooseveit Committee, 7 
East Forty-fourth Street, will hold 
a meeting at 6 o'clock this evening 
at the Hotel Park Central, Theme 
for the meeting is “Better a Fourth 
Term Than a Third World War.” 


| 


SURPLUS OF WOOL 
CALLED DANGEROUS 


View Expressed by Ackerman 
on Way to Wyoming Parley 
on Various Proposals 


Wool growers welcome any con- 


structive suggestion that will aid 
in solving the existing surplus wool 
problem, F. Eugene Ackerman, 
executive director of the American 
Wool Council, said yesterday in 
discussing the so-called Hill plan, 
which will be thoroughly gone into 
at the annual meeting starting to- 
day of the Wyoming Wool Grow- 
ers Association at the Henning 
Hotel, Casper, Wyo. The surplus 
problem, he explained, is as dan- 
gerous to wool manufacturers as it 
is to growers. 

Supported generally by growers, 
the Hill plan, devised by Dean J. A. 
Hill, College of Agriculture, Uni- 
versity of Wyoming, a wool author- 
ity, contemplates having the Gov- 
ernment take over all the wool in 
this country, both domestic and 
foreign, and become the sole owner 
of foreign wool. It would return 
to the American producer 52 cents 
a clean pound above the world 
price. 

The convention, Mr. Ackerman 
continued, will give serious consid- 
eration to the implications con- 





| 
| 
TIMES Weekly Index of Business 
Activity) dropped to 128.5 from 
1143.2 in the preceding week. The 


figure for the week ended Nov. 30, 
1943, was 133.9. 


Sounds Out Employes on Needs 


In response to a questionnaire 
on post-war buying, employes of 
the Socony-Vacuum Oil Company, 
Inc., in New York City indicated 
that it will be automobiles, elec- 
trical appliances and radios in that 
order. Responses were received 
from 1,803 out of the 3,000 ques- 
tionnaires sent out and 762 em- 
ployes, or 42 per cent, stated that 


(a component of THE NEW YORK| 


| automobiles will be among the first | 


purchases, Ten employes expect to 
buy helicopters. Seventy-seven 
would be first interested in nylon 
hosiery and seventeen in girdles. 


In affectionate memory of Herman Plaut, 
our founder and beloved associate, our 
offices will be closed Tuesday, October 


November 1, 1944, 
PLAUT CO. 


43 West 36th St. 
New York 18, N. Y. 





CHILDREN’S, JUNIORS’, INFANTS’ WEAR 


PINWALE corduroy overalls, sizes 2-4-6 
wanted; large quantities. Jobber, X2530 Times 


CONTRACT WORK WANTED & OFFERED 


CLOTH and leather cut into any size or shape; 
equipped with 2 Seybold cutters and Sheridan 
die press. Contracts solicited. D. Hurwitz & 
Son, CA 6-4526. 309 Canal St, NY 
CONTRACTOR wanted by mfr'er with large 
production, expd children’s knitwear, polo 
shirts, creepers, pajamas; any items that can 
be made on Singer & Merrow. AS824 Times 


CONTRACTOR Wanted, to do ‘plain sewing on 
Singer machines; large quantities, simple 


work. GR 3-1950 
for knitted basque 
iI 7-0142 





CONTRACTORS wanted 


shirts; steady work 1 7-( 
CORDE PLANT 
OPEN FOR ADDITIONAL CONTRACTS 
BAL-YON MFG 
39 E 30TH, MU 4 1512 


TEXTILES. We ‘mangle crushed goods, pieces 
or remnants; work wanted __ GR 78418. 

| MANUFACTURER Wants Ladies’ Mannish Style 
| pajamas or kindred line; stitching only. 
/X2702_Times. se IN 
WANTED. Contractor for Sewing & Stuffing 
leather novelties. MU 3-0427. 


COTTON GOODS 


ALL. Nainsooks, White, 64x60 to 96x100; Satins, 
Crepes for Slips, Rayon Knits for Panties 
Wanted. Darling, 76 Madison, LE 2-6398 


BLEACHED - unbleached, drilis - twill 
wanted; i-10 yards; full pieces 
Whitmor, 927 Flushing Av, Bklyn 


BROADCLOTHS, twills, gabardines wanted in 
all colors. WA 9-2761. 
BUTCHER weave wanted. All colors, for cash. 
Phone PE 6-9033. 
CAMBRIC 80/80 white sanforized, printed per- 
cales, pocketing twill, unbleached drills, 
twills, lightweight duck; full pieces or shorts 
wanted by manufacturer. Smith, 915 Bway 
CANDY Striped Cottons Wanted. Quantities, 
will extend priorities Industrial Manufac- 
turers, 40 W 25th. CH 2-7462 
COTTONS AND RAYONS 
ALSO RAYON LININGS 
ANY QUANTITY WANTED ia 
Sanjo Sportswear, 470 7 Av __CH 4-7827 
|GOTTON goods wanted, 96/100 combed yarn, 
other cotton goods suitable infants’ dresses; 
blouses, slips; all constructions. AA4 priority; 
cash. WI 7-1296; 450 7 Av (Rm 809) 


COTTONS & RAYONS 


Wanted, any widths, weights, lengths. 
CENTURY. 112 WORTH ST. RE 2-8693 


COTTONS WANTED 
All types; chambrays, ginghams, seersuckers. 
Harrison, 212 W 35th. WI 7-3982 
COTTON Duck Wanted. Herringbone twills, 
drills, surplus, government released; shorts, 
in gray goods or finished. MU 4-0778 


COTTON goods wanted: sheeting, sateens, nain- 
sqek and flannel, all colors and construction; 


cash; AA for priorities. BR 9-4769. 
Wanted—Bleached, 


COTTON GOODS 

bleached, lawn, print cloth, nainsooks, 
| loon, tracing. Cash. Phone WI 7¢5798. 
| COTTONS, all types, wanted for cash; imme- 
| diate or future delivery. Treasure Frocks, 224 
w 35th. CH 4-4942 Soa a: ELS Se 
| Gor TON quis: d housecoats, sizes 16-44, 370 W 

th, Room 1405. BR 9-61300 00 
COTTON Kasha Linings Wanted—Cash. Nor- 

mandie Sportswear, 261 W_ 35th, LA 4-2828 























un- 
bal- 


Buyers’ Wants, Cont'd. 


COTTON GooDs 


ANY width or construction cotton goods want- 
ed, greige or white; cash. MU 3-9166. 


40-40 GREIGE 50” or wider wanted, or equiy- 
alent quality. LA 4-0274. 


FUR COATS, SCARFS AND TRIMMINGS 


BLACK and gray Persian paw bodies wanted. 
LA 4-9377. 


BLACK Persian Paw bodies wanted; spot cash. 
LA. 4-7587. 


FUR Tuxedos wanted, jobs, close-outs only. 
Harry Margolin, 222 W 37th. 


MOUTON tuxedos and Norwegian Blue Foxes 
wanted. Phil Gray, 252 W 38th. CH 4-2887. 


PERSIAN lamb coats from $150 to $300 wanted; 
cash; 10-12 A M. General Fur, 48 W 27th. 


Also jobs other good furs; 
TRYLON COATS, 


cash. 
252 W 37TH. 


Immediately, sterlin 
compacts, stone bracelets, small 
or’s purse. Call MU 5-8198 
LININGS 
CREPES and twills wanted, spring shades only. 
_Twinley Coats, 247 W 38th. WI 7-7585. 


CREPE and celanese satin; all colors wanted. 
BR 9-7869. 


CREPE iinings, All New Spring Colors Want- 
ed. LA 4-3186 


WANTED. silver heart 


zipper sail- 


CREPES, SATINS WANTED. CASH. 
MILO FASHIONS, 247 W STITH 
LININGS wanted; twills, satins, taffetas and 


serges, large quantities. Smart Maid Coats, 
545 Av ME 3-3570 


RAYON TWILLS, Satins and All Types Lining, 
Wantea. Clive Coat, 265 W 37th. 
RAYON LININGS WANTED—ALL COLORS 
CH 4-3370 
Cash. 





SATINS Kass Coat, 
W 37th. 


TWILLS, spring shades, wanted; cash. 
Koen, 247 W 37th. 


RAYONS 

ALL blouse fabrics wanted. 
_Wwear, 141 Ww 36th, BR 9-08 
ANY Fabric, Suitable Shoulder 
quantities, lengths, 
LO_5-5167 
BENGALINES, failles, also check and plaid 
_taffetas wanted. Smart-Rite, 545 8 Av. 
CAVALRY  Twills, Gabardines, Bengalines 
wanted. Myrtle Sportswear, 141 W 36th. 
CAVALRY twills & gabardines wanted, all 

Delmay, 1384 Bway. GR_7-5406. 


Wanted. 252 


Marlene Sports- 
77 


Pads, 


Any 
colors wanted. Phone 





colors 


JERSEY Tricots, 75 or 55 Deniers, All Shades 

ee International Underwear, LE 
-8283. 

JERSEYS, printed crepes, spuns wanted; cash 
Robert Horowitz, 148 W th. LA 4-8724. 


NYLON wanted, by yard or pound; Govern- 
ment rejects; any quantity, any color; high 
cash paid. TF844 Times. 


PRINTED French crepes wanted; large quanti- 
ty; cash. CA 6-4513. 


PRINTED SPUN RAYONS WANTED 
__Starmoon, 231 _W. 40th. PE 6-8439 
PURPLE gabardines wanted. Will exchange for 
_white or gray. BR 9-0053 aS é 
|RAYON Satin & Twill, Full Pieces or Shorts 
wanted by manufacturer 
SMITH, 915 BWAY, N Y 


RAYONS & cotton wanted, all kinds, plain 
& prints. Dubin, WI 17-9575 











COTTONS and Rayons Wanted. In all colors 
& fabrics. Ramsey Sportwear, 19 W_ 36th _ 
COTTON gabardines; poplins wanted; natural 
red, blue, putty. CH 4-5931 
COTTON O. D. Nets, Taffeta Linings, Other 
Fabrics Wanted LO 5-4830 
COTTON gabardine wanted, all all 
weights. Woodbine, 499 7 Av 
COVERT cloth, tan, width 3 
inches, wanted. EV 77-6107. 
DENIM, Any Width, Weight, Quantity, Blue or 
Maroon, Wanted. 23954 Times 
DRAPERY fabrics wanted, any width, color, 
quantity; cash. CH 4-4081 
DUCK, greige or finished, quantities wanted. 
Dura Products Co, 62 W 45th. MU 2-6758. 
DUVETYNS suedines wanted; tan, luggage; 
rayon lining. K238 Times. _ = 
GABARDINES AND TWILL 
ALL COLORS WANTED _ CA 6-7180 me 
GABARDINES, Cotton, Eggshell & Tan, Bed 
wanted. Block, 500 7 Ay. PuRh ie 
HERRINGBONE twill, olive drab wanted, 36”, 
any quantity Dubin, WI 7-9575 
LAWN organdie, unbleached sheeting, muslin, 
mainsook wanted. Large quantities for cash 
Reisman Doll, 30 W 24 St. GR 3-8127 


LAWNS, nainsooks wanted, 96/100 or balloon 
quality; cash, AA3 priority LO 5-3856 
MULTIFILAMENT, Batiste and Organdy Want- 
ed. WI 7-5589 
PLAIN AND PRINTS WANTED 
SUITABLE FOR DRESSES 
Birnbaum, Rosenbloom, Yellen, 505 8 Av. 
SATEENS WANTED, WHITE OR GREIGE 
OR FINISHED; ANY QUANTITY. 
JACOB DE JONG, 19 W 36TH 


SPORT DENIM _ 


wills & cotton sultings wanted EV_ 17-8637. 


colors, 








|Z 
| shorts or pound goods. Cash. MU 4-5044. 
| TERRY CLOTH, or Any Satisfactory substitute, 
| white or colors wanted Bathasweet Corp 
1911 Park Av . LE 4-3757 ; i 
| TWILLS, duck, navy, khaki of other colors 
| wanted, WA_%-2955. a 
| FWILLS, gabardines wanted; black, white, 
navy, brown and pastels. PE 6-9036. 
LARGE Amount of Kasha Wanted, Have Pri- 
ority; also cotton gabardines, pl s & inter- 
linings. Smart Maid Coats, 545 8 AY ME 3-3580 
WANTED, cottons, rayons, any constrection; 
piain, printed; cash. O589 Times 
| WANTED cotton seersucker, quantit 
preference rating available. LA 4 








My omestie 


RAYON, spuns, plain and printed wanted; on 
_ export priority. CA 6-4380 
SATINS and crepes wanted; pastel colors; any 
quantity; cash. WI 7-7719. 


VELVETS, VELVETEENS AND CORDUROYS 


CORDUROY, pin wale, wide wale, thick set 
wanted. WO, 4-6947 


CORDUROY Pinwale Wanted. All colors; cash. 
261 W 35th, 2d floor. LA 4-2828. 

CORDUROYS Wanted—Wide wale 54”, all col- 
ors; cash. Boverman. PE 6-7310. 


VELVETS WANTED, CRUSH RESISTANT 
Transparent black, colors; any quantity. 
Meyer Bosniak, 1385 Bway. WI 7-4630. 


WOOLENS 


SUEDES WANTED 
Wyandotte, Stevens, Deering Milliken, 
Buckley & Cohens, cash. LA 4-3281. 
ALL WOOL GENUINE SHETLANDS 
Wanted, powder, toast, aqua, gold 
Bobbycraft, 270 W 39th. WI 7-4470. 


ALL-WOOL genuine shetlands wanted; gold, 
dawn, aqua, mint, American Beauty, toast 
and coral. Ed-Rho Coat Co, 242 W 38 St 


ALL-WOOL genuine Shetlands, Deland P-56- 
similar, pastel shades; pay cash Gabe Latkin 
Coat Co, 222 W 37th LA 4-9565. 
ALL-WOOL genuine shetland wanted, coco or 
medium orown; also spring shades, Zimco 
Sportswear, LO 5-3663 
ALL wool nude suedes and fleeces wanted; 
genuine Shetlands, acqua, lime, melon, chalk 
stripes. gray. CH 4-4714 
ALL WOOL flannels, Botany, D & M or siml- 
lar twills, gabardines, crepes; spring shades, 
wanted for cash. LO 5-6550. 
ALL Wool Flannels, Crepes Wanted. Light 
shades, suitable skirts; cash. LA 4-2828 
ALL 


Wool Jersey Wanted, Blouse or Dress 





ALL WOOL 





TACKLE twill, navy, wanted; full pieces, | weight all shades: cash. CH 4-2422 


ALL WOOL Navy Melton wanted. Cali TA 
4-4308 


ALL-WOOL gray fiannei, 
wanted. WI 7-418,” 
|}All wool genuine Shetlands wanted, light 
colors. WI 77-4188 


7 


AMERICAN 13051-24800-00844-19008, Farnsworth 
1045, Gera 3771, Cleveland 3447 or similar 
wanted. Aronow, 240 W 37th. 
AMERICAN 
Kessel 9681 Wanted—Cash. Lemart Coats, 
545 8 Av. LO 3-6221 


AMERICAN 13051, Biack & Brown 


238 or 245 wanted at mill cost. 
MR. WEINRIB, AL 4-7305. 


Hockanum type, 


SHETLANDS 


Leading citizens 
read it 


PATHFINDER, news weeke 
ly edited in Washington, 
has a loyal readership in 
smaller cities and towns 
throughout the United 


States. 


PATHFINDER 


News Weekly from the Nation’s Capitet | 


FARM JOURNAL BUILDING | 
Washington Square Philadelphia 5, Pe 
Graham Patterson, Publisher 


or 
420 Lexington Ave., New York 17, N. ¥. 
Telephone: Murray Hill 3-7196 


Buyers’ Wants, Cont’d 


WOOLENS 


AMERICANS Wanted—24890; all colors; or will 
exchange 13051. ME 3-1810. 


AMERICAN 13051, BLACK & ALL COLORS 


_WANTED, LA _4-8743. 


AMERICAN 24890-09844 Commodore 464 want- 
ed. Gangel-Kitay, 241 W 37th. 


AMERICAN 13080, 09844, all col 
Gaynes, 500 7 Av. CH 4-6262 


AMERICAN, £13098, gold, blue, aqua, toast 
wanted; quantity for cash. WI 7-7256. 


AMERICAN 24924, Also 9610, All Shades Want- 
ed. PE 6-4247 


ors, wanted. 


AMERICAN 13098 brown 212, similar wanted; 
manufactures only LO 5-2341 

AMERICAN, 8011 AND 7650, WANTED; CASH. 
AL 4-1122. 

LACK genuine Shetland Wanted. 
4308, mill cost. WI 7-9860. 


DELAND P56 blacks wanted, Parker 2490, 522, 
Dexter 8450, 627; cost. WI 7-9860 
FLANNELS, gray P W or similar, wanted. 
_Myrtle Sportswear, 141 W 36th. LA 4-1439 

GABARDINE genuine Shetland wanted; cash. 
_ Milo Fashions, 247 W 37th. 

GENUINE Shetlands, American or D & M, all 
shades wanted. PE 6-4247. 

GENUINE Shetlands and part wool fabrics 
wanted; all shades. WA 5-5681. 
GENUINE Shetlands Wanted, 

__ quantity; cash. LA 4.0197. 

as 7: 31 © eee red, fuchsia, green wanted. 


LO 5-1: 

LAWRENCE 1608-3 WANTED, ANY QUAN- 
_ TITY. LA 4-6288. 

LAWRENCE 621, black, gray or similar wanted. 
LA_4-5560 
LAWRENCE 621 or similar wanted, black. 
Shelbrooke Coats, 252 W 38th. 

LAWRENCE 621 wanted, or 
Lebanon 224. PE 6-1336. 


MANIPULATED twills, rayon & wool, wanted. 
CH 4-5668. 


MELTONS, 28-30 OZ. 
BLACKS AND BROWNS WANTED 
PHONE WI 7-9460 


MORGANS Spring and Fall knit fleeces wanted; 
all colors. ME 3-0625. 


Also 





Pastels, Any 


will exchange 


BUSINESS 


tained in a recent statement of 
Arthur Besse, president of the Na- 
tional Association of Wool Manu- 
facturers, that wool growers 
through “political manipulation” 
have forced the Army to pay a 
subsidy of 52 cents a clean pound 


on domestic wool used in Army 
uniform materials. 

“The so-called subsidy which 
Mr. Besse castigates so severely 
merely represents the difference 
between production costs for do- 
mestic wool and comparable for- 
eign wools plus the existing 
tariff,” Mr.: Ackerman stated yes- 
terday previous to his departure 
for Casper, where delegations of 
manufacturers and dealers will be 


present to protest against consid- | 


eration of the Hill plan of wool 
control. 


POLITICAL ADVERTISEMENT 


——_——____—_—_. 


ADVERTISING 
PEOPLE 


Help Elect Roosevelt! 


Come to FDR Rally 
TONIGHT 


PARK CENTRAL HOTEL 
Florentine Room 


Tth Ave. & 55th St, 
Begins 6:00 P. M—Ends 7:30 


Speakers: 
* VINCENT SHEEHAN 


War Correspondent 


* ANN BURR 


Broadway Star 


* FRED KEATING 


Entertainer 


* JEROME WEIDMAN 


Author 


*& UNANNOUNCED NATIONAL | 


PERSONALITY 


(War Duties Permitting) 


ADVERTISING MEN & WOMEN 
FOR ROOSEVELT 


Ted Patrick, Chairman 
ROOM 508, 7 EAST 44 ST., MU 2.7792 


FOR SALE _ 


SHIP REPAIR SHOP—Com. | 
plete with $65,000 equipment. 
STATUS —Grossed $250,000 last 
year. Profitably. 

REASON FOR SELLING— 
Started and still operated by divi- 
sion of internationally known com- 
pany whose own business was cur- 
tailed. Conditions now permit te- 
sumption of own business. 
FUTURE PROSPECTS—sShip 
repair work plus conversion of troop 
ships to passenger vessels is ex- 
pected to keep booming for three 
post-war years, 
REFERENCES—We invite the 


strictest investigation. 
| PRICE— $40,000. 


Principals Only 


X 2771 Times 


| 
| 








Buyers’ Wants, Cont'd. 


GENERAL MERCHANDISE— 
Standard Lines & Surplus Stocks 
WANTED for cash, handkerchiefs, pipes, knives, 
kitchen ware, razor blades, fountain pens, 
mechanical pencils, toothbrushes, shoelaces, 
etc. Paul Cohen Co, Inc, 881 Bway. AL 4-4875 


WE are interested in quantity military hair 
brushes. What have you to offer? K173 
Times. 

COMPLETE Stock of Military Merchandise 
wanted for cash. GR 7-7535, X2729 Times. 


[errenixcs ro muvene | 


_CHILDREN’S, JUNIORS’, INFANTS’ WEAR 


INFANTS’ wear of better grade, slips, dresses 
a creepers; immediate delivery. X2686 
mes. 


COATS, SUITS AND DRESSES 


COATS, suits, dresses, blouses, better kinds; 


tremendous values Roberts, 552 7 Av 
DRESSES, $4.75 and $6.75, plyarns. Joan- 
Bonnie Dresses, 249 W 34th 





| 


POLITICS 


E Times-Herald 

does not play pol- 

itics, either in Wash- 

ington or in che ad- 

_vertising councils of 
Industry. 

There is no situa- 
tion in which the 
Business Depart- 
ment can invoke 
editorial aid. 

By firmly refusing 
to sell its influence 
to any single adver- 
tiser, in any industry, 
Washington's Inde- 
pendent Newspaper 
is best able to render 
the greatest service 
to all. 


| 





Editor and Publisher 


Times BaTierald 


WASHINGTON, D. CG 
LARGEST CIRCULATION IN WASHINGTON 
a 
National Representatives 
GEO, A. McDEVITT CO, 


| 








FIC issues 3-year study on 

economic, sociological, other 

aspects of Advertising Business . . 
Nebraska ailocates $100,000 fer ed- 
vertising te encourage state-wide 
prohibition iews . . . Opinion poll 
sters discuss difficulties, veriables 
of pel'ing techniques in 44 campaign. 


TIDE 
NOV. 1 Issve 
—— 


out Now 


3 Offerings to Buyers, Cont'd. 


WOCLENS 
WOOL PILE. Have 1,400 yds 50% mohair, 9% 
alpaca, first quality. Call PE 6-7307 
ZIPPERS 


ZIPPERS FOR SALE 


Various sizes for many trades 
RAVELLE CO. 13 E 37th MU 3-435. 
ZIPPERS, Hooks & Eyes, Tapes redyed from 
any color A-1l Dye 118 W 224 CH 32-8887-8. 
10,000 16-INCH separating tippers, 0 D color; 
spot delivery K104 Times 

GENERAL MERCHANDISE— 

Standard Lines & Surplus Stocks 

ARMY AND NAVY SURPLUS 
Regulations sweaters, wool helmets. sheep-lined 
caps, leather jackets. Henry Modell & Co, 230 
Bway. N Y 7. 


BANDAGES, 








2-in = 6 yards, sterilized roller 
gauze, iuitadle hospitals and retall trade. %e 
doz; 100 doz to case; 500 cases: immediate de- 


livery. Box 988. 1 Beekman St 


BEAUTIFUL pastel colored veneers. Hartigwood 

impregnated 10 M sq ft new 12 rotary 
sheets 3x6 ft; l0c ft. ACS, 342 Madison av. 
|MU_ 2-3901 





DRESSES, betier kind, extensive assortment; | 
sacrificing. Cohen Dress, 470 7th 


AVAILABLE, printed seersucker dresses; export 
AAS priority required. K148 Times. 


COTTON GOODS 


ASSORTED remnants shorts, pounds; export- 
domestic. Mendelsohn Textile, 377 Bway. 


COTTON JERSEY; also cuffing; assorted col- 
ors. Store, 475 Broome St. 

COTTON goods wanted; all kinds woven fab- 
rics. Cotton Club Frocks, 275 7 Av. CH 2-1220. 

POPLIN & Mountain Cloth, O D Quantities; 
ceiling prices; redyeing arranged if required. 

Berger, 1472 Bway. 








PRINT cloth remnants, % to 8 yards OD. | 


shade, water repellent, 4,000 pounds; 
netting 48” and 54” widths, tubular; 
colors. R1040 Times Downtown. 


REMNANTS—SECONDS—POUNDS 
FOR DOMESTIC & EXPORT TRADE. WIL- 
CONE MI SUP, 74 FRANKLIN, WA 5-8824-§ 


rayon 
assorted | 


WEBBING, White Herringbone 14” wide, 150.-| 


000 yards in rolls, $1.75 per hundred yards 
Webbing Products Corp, 28 W 15 St. Tel. CH 


O'DONNELL-ELLIS 508, black only, and gen-| 3' 5445 


ulne Shetlands wanted. 
price only PE 6-6830 


PACIFIC wanted, 1303, all shades Kelly, red; 
genuine Shetlands, other woolens. PE 6-9033. 

PACIFICS 7150, all colors wanted. Gaynes, 
Inc 500 7 Av. CH 4-6262 

PARKERS Menswear, Gray or Similar Wanted 
—Cash. Topsall Sportswear, 247 W 35th. 


PARKER-WILDER plaids wanted; fall; cash. 
261 W 35th (2d). LA 4-2828 


Fall shades, mill 


OFFERING printed cottons, export AAS; also 
knitted tubular. O56 Times 


FUR COATS, SCARFS AND TRIMMINGS 
BLACK striped coney coats, ckets, muffs, 
tuxedos. Weinberg, Io6 W 29th. LA 4-5953 


CROSS Persian coats, well made, sacrifice. 
Elm Fur Novelty, 145 W 27th. 


TO close out 150 fine beaver Mouton trim- 
mings, some with cuffs; bargain. George 


.| Altman & Co, 333 7 Av: PE 6-0940. 


Genuine; red, Stevens, Pacifics, 
similar and all other colors wanted. Ver- 

sailles, 470 7 Av. 

SHETLANDS, GENUINE WANTED; 100% 
WOOL; SPRING SHADES; CASH. AL 4-1122. 
SHETLANDS, genuine, spring shades, wanted; 
cash. Isidore Koen, 247 W 37th 


SPRING GENUINE SHETLANDS 
Crepes, black and whites and casual cloths 
wanted. Wolf & Barse, 225 W 37th. _ 
. SPRING GENUINE SHETLANDS 

100% wool; spot cash. Levy & Witkoff, 
: >, 261 W 38 St a ae 
SPRING Crepes Wanted. All wool, also wor- 
sted. Kaplan Bros, 226 W 37 St 


SPRING Crepes and Genuine Shetlands Wanted. 
Sol Chernoff, 500 7 Av. BR 4-8984. 

4245, AMERICAN 13051 WANTED 
ASS COAT, 252 W 37TH 


STEVENS 4240 or similar wanted, red, kelly, 
black, brown, navy: will pay cash. LA 4-8558. 
SUEDES WANTED 
ALL SHADES 
WOLF & BARSE, 225 W 37TH. 
SUEDES, Spring Colors, Deering-Milliken, 

Stevens, Similar Wanted. LA 4-3186. 


TWILLS, Taffetas, Serges Wanted. 
LO 5-3852. 


STEVENS 
K. 


WOOLENS wanted, crepes, flannels, gabardines 
and twills, in all colors. Call WI 7-7660 
WOOLENS, 100% genuine shetlands, wanted. 

Sunnybrook Sportswear, 1359 Bway 
WYANDOTTES wanted, 1875, 1850, 1825, 1815, 
1805, 1855, 1840; cost. WI 7-9860. 


ZIPPERS 


ZIPPERS WANTED 
Any size, make or quantity; cash. 
LEON A. SUTTON CO, 
13 E. 37TH. MU 3-4256. 0 
ZIPPERS New or Reconditioned, 13-inch and 
up, Mesh Wanted. Dura Products Co, 6? 
W 45th. MU 2-6758. 


GENERAL MERCHANDISE— 
Standard Lines & Surplus Stocks 


ACETATE MOLDING POWDER WANTED 
Medium soft flow: virgin material preferred; 
on at all colors; quantities, Whiteford, 
- 0626. 


ARMY and Navy goods, wallets and novelties 


wanted. Bengor, 119 5 Av, AL 4-5049. 
BRAIDS, Laces, Tapes, Ribbons, Yarns, Ete; 
. sold. De Luxe Trimming Co, 230 
x. AS 4-0764. 
COTTONS, Rayons, Shorts, Piece Goods Wanted 
All Types; cash Modern Fabrics, CA 6-1947. 


DRESS SNAPS; QUANTITY WANTED; SPOT 
CASH. Lo 5-8025 ti BE... 
ELASTIC, rayon, cotton, all widths; also mill 
ends wanted. _MU_4-2532 on 
FELT WANTED. Any color, an 


quantity, any 
width. Adar Co, 39 W 32d E 6-0945 


LEATHERETTE, for Folding Chair Seats 
Wanted. Adirondack, 1140 Bway, AS 4-1385 


LUCITE ',” Masked Wanted. Blizlee Products. 
MU 4-6650 

RIBBON close-outs wanted. OU. 8. Ribbon Co, 

239 W 39 St. LO 5-1962 


UMBRELLAS—MEN'S & WO 
ALSO WHISKEY FLASKS W. 
JACK GOLDSTON 
13 W 26 ST. 


LET out muskrat coats, to close out. Room 


1201, 236 W 26 St. BR 9-3979. 
JEWELRY 
ANKLETS, sterling compacts, exp bracelets, 
pearls, rhinestone bracelets, sterling rhine- 
stone pins and sets; jobbers only. 19 W 34 (722) 
IDENTIFICATION Bracelets, Mexican Silver, 
Heavy chains, 5 gross. VA 6-1564 
RHINESTONES & JEWELS—Bought and Sold 
Have Millinery Sew-On Jewels, $4.50 gross 
and up. Phone MU 4-1158 
RHINESTONES, chatons, crystal & colors; all 
sizes;_also demi-fines. LO 5-186. 
STERLING SILVER COMPACTS 
Nice Lot Immediately Available 

DY687_TIMES 
EXQUISITE plastics, with and without 
stones. Earrings, pins, clips, bracelets. Con- 
trasts, modern and Persian designs. Styles con- 
fined. Jobbers only. X2627 Times. 


LININGS 
SHEEPSKIN LEATHER LINING 
MR SILVERMAN, PE 6-3866 
HAVE Fuchsia and RAF twill serge. WIHl ex- 
change for spring shade or buy outright. LA 
4-9565. 
MATERIALS FOR EXCHANGE 
EXCHANGE Pacific 3265, Gray, Blue, Black; 
for suedes, all shades. LO 5-6470. 


WILL Exchange 6-Ounce & 48.2 Black Combed 
cotton twill for equivalent value white twill. 
K232 Times. 
WILL exchange 
Army green 
WILL exch 
WI 17-0143 





ange zippers for rayon linings. 


RAYONS 


BRUSHED Rayons, All Colors, Mex Ginghams; 

__also_prntd_jerseys. Modern Fabrica, 405 Bway 

CREPE-SATIN, 5,000,000 pieces, approximate 
aize 3%” 4q-7" st and larger; pink, white, 

tearose __GR 7-0524. 

PURE silk parachutes, new, white, 16 panels; 
suitable shoulder pads; bonnet linings, dick- 

ow = hankies, tie linings; reasonable. WI 


RAYON acetate » 1,000 yards, rust, biue, 
wine; 19-inch rolls. GR 7-0524. 


CAN SECURE quantities cospet, satins, at con- 
verters’ ceiling prices with proper priorities 
aranteeing yarn replacement. No exporters. 
‘ommunicate Z3876 Times. 


QUANTITY rayon nets, white; 35°-36" wide. 
K138 Times. 


SPORTSWEAR 


CLOSE-OUTS skirts, slacks, suits, shorts, 


jumpers i’ W_ 36th, 14th floor 
WOOLENS 


AMERICAN 13185-7620, Cleveland 3464; 100% 
wool genuine Shetlands WI 17-6404 


COMMODORE 1700, needle point, biack or 
navy; mill price; fur linings at cost. Box 
753. 1474 Broadway 


JOEL'S boucle #6693, black & blue. CA 6-577). 


ODONNELL & ELLIS 106, ali shades; Law- 
rence 905 fuchsia. LO 3-3947 


PIECE GOODS. Lawrence and Groves style 
black; Philip Lawrence £228; Buckley and 
Cohen #136. WI 7-2090, Ben 





solids. A. Jacobs, 393 Bway 


| CLOTHING. 


re all-wool clastique Tor | 
7-7153 


BRAIDS, Cords, Tassels, Fringes for all kinds 
of manufacturers Cahn, 821 6 A¥ 
CHAIRS, folding, $16.75 per dozen; factory 
chairs Adirondack, 1140 Bway, AS 4-1385. 
CHENILLE SPREADS, ROBES, TOYS, FIRST 
QUALITY. AMERICAN MADE MERCANTILE 
co 571 BWAY. CA 6-7978 
CHILDREN’S sheepskin slippers, muffs; #18 
dozen; immediate delivery; 15” sheepskin rab- 
bits, $18 dog Barack, 37 W 
CHRISTMAS stocking fillers. for chains and 
jobbers, good assortment of Sc and i0e toys. 
Habob. 41 W 19. N Y¥. WA 9-0565 
Thousands of Men's, Students’ 
Suits, Pants, Leather Coats, Sheepskins: ime 
mediate delivery, right prices. Visit A. haap 
& Sons, 394 Bway 
CORRUGATED boxes: 26,200 34x34 a2Sas 
23,500 4x4 4x27; 11,550 2% x2*4x1,: 
13,850 44x44x4'%. Box 1064 Rochester, 
N Y 
| CORRUGATED Shipping Cartons, With Corra- 
gated dividers (8,500) size Sioxl0x8, holds 3 
dozen 3-ounce bottles no priority necessary, 
|price l4c, FOB N Y. MU 2? 
|CORRUGATED Cartons, New, 200-Lb Test, 
stock sizes; immediate delivery; special sizes 
jmade to order LA 4-8227 


CORRUGATERD Boxes, 5,000 24xlexis, 
| 17xl1x10; others. Midtown Carton Co 
|28th, MU 3-0427 


Ww 
|CORRUGATED boxes, 19\9xl6x6, 12%4x74x22%, 
22x744x11%: stock other sizes. Globe, 502 W 
Bway. AL 4-3426 pnteiiiimedl 
CORRUGATED cartons, 25x15x15, 20x14éx14, 
27%x2244x22\4; many others on hand. D. & J. 
Corrugated, 61 Greene St. CA 6-0704 
CORRUGATED cartons, 11 by 7 by 4 deepe 
large quantity, reasonable price. M. HZ. 
Dicker, 112 Ludlow St, OR 4-1113 


CORRUGATED Cartons, Large, Small, Medium 
sizes; immediate delivery. CH 22-8252 


| COSMETICS: offer toiletwater, after-shave le« 
|}. tion and bath salts in fancy bottles Per- 
| fumery Lybozo, 150 W 1g St 
| COVERALLS, Men's © D Herringbone, © @ 
Army cloth immediate very Service- 
wear 16 Waverly Pl. AL 4 
ELASTIC bunalastic; all widths; 
lumbia, 373 Sth: MU 5-1470 
FANCY MUPPLERS—MEN’S, LADIES” 
ASSORTED PATTERNS, WHITE 
For November Delivery 
K229 Times 
FINE quality surgical scissors, $9.56 dos. Paal 
Cohen. 881 Broadway 
FIRST Quality Boxed, Embossed 5-Piece Bridge 
set, $12; embossed guest towels, $2: neg 
cash Pavone, 1165 Bway 
GENUINE corde hats, all colors and white: im- 
Mediate delivery. Yaeger. 55 W 39. LA 4-317 


GOLD STAMPING. Immediate delivery. 
Lederer, 125 W 33 St. PE 6-2251. 


HANDBAGS, 20 doz ladies’ leather and moire, 
colors; $7.50 quality, closeout. 131 W 53 St, 
Sth fl: CI 7-3667 


LASTEX yarn, real rubber, long pieces; cheap. 
LE 2-7482 

a zipper pulls, random; 

| livery. _K 241 Times. _ 

MEXICAN 1-Ply Twine, Available in Coils oF 
balls; prompt shipment from Texas. RE 2-S353, 

MILITARY Kits, Fitted & Plain; Closeout. 
Kits Mfg Co, 1275 Bway 


| PORCELAINS, complete for hot plates, beater 
colls Albin. 22 W 25th 


SAFETY PINS, I5e per gross in 1.000 
lots. size 00 Closed 10 gross boxes 
values in Straight & Safety pins Kiz T 


SCRAP leather Skivers, assorted 
proximate 5,000 pounds, 
facturing small articles; 
CH 2-3830 
SHEARLINGS, ELECTRIFIED, NATURAL, PO- 
LOYACRALATED, BROWN BACKED 5 AND 
INCH PILE; SIZABLE QUANTITIES. 
2619 TIMES 


| STAINLES§ steel flatware for hotels, restaa- 

rants, inst, clubs; bright finish. finest quale 
ity; teaspoons, $2.20; forks, $3.30; soupspoons, 
$3.30 doz K178 Times 


SUPERB values! SOc lipstick, gross $14. 
Dollar cologne; elegant package: gross $21 
Dolls, dozen $14.40; other outstanding bSuys. 
Mills Sales Co. 1 Bway 


TOYS, jobbers, dealers, new fast selling, beae- 
tifully finished: $2 retail item. sells al sight 
008 Av M 


10th 
9th 








5,068 
6 








de 


OFA 


bunacerd. Co- 





immediate de~ 


Tom 
ther 
Imes 
colers, ap- 
excellent for manu- 

reasonable price, 


| 





Rklyn 
Car & Track Tires, 
> all OPA tire reguila- 


dit ne 


priced right 
USED Army Passenger 
popular sizes, subject 
tions. U S Surplus « 
iSt, Newburgh, N Y vl . —— 
WALLETS, MEN'S AND LADIES 
Key cases, purses loseouts L & C Leathe 
Goods Co, 1133 Bway. near 26 St acre 
150,000 WITTECH adjustable (hose clamps). ap 
| to 2 inches; entire lot $4,750 Box 1064, 
| Rochester, N Y; phone Main 258 
LARGE quantity riding spurs, t 
wishbone type; nickel, silver 
8 W 30th. 


| t 


mm es « F 


near 





S. Cavairs, 
alloy Aeon, 
4 





SINGLE 


LE-PRIGE RULE (Mamed.byAmericon Con 
IS SHELVED BY OPA 


Plans Instead New Regulations, | 
Use of Charts and GMPR | 
Revisions, Ney Explains | 


UNIFORM ORDER PRESSED 


Wolf Announces Study to Start 
at Once—Roos Sees Gradual | 
Post-War Price Drop 


| 

After more than a year of weil 
on “one of the toughest problems} 
any one ever tackled,” the Office 
of Price Administration is giving 
up its plan for a single over-all re-| James A. Stewart, vice president 
tail pricing regulation and instead|of the American Can Company, 
will draft new specific regulations| formerly in charge of packers’ can 
for more important items, use the manufacture, has been relieved of 


|all his duties in that connection to 
pricing chart method of MPR 330) head a newly formed research and 
for some commodities, 


and issue| development department, D. W. 
a revised and simplified “general| Figgis, president, announced yes- 
max” for others, Jerome M. Ney,|terday. Object of the move, Mr. 
new director of the consumer goods|Figgis explained, is to focus in 
price division of the OPA, said) °"° department all of the com- 


yesterday. development and marketing re- 
He spoke at the fall merchan-|sources on assistance to canners, 
dising conference of the National packers and manufacturers in con- 
Retail Dry Goods Association at| nection with new products and new 
the Hotel Pennsylvania, which con-| containers. 
tinues today. 
The conference also heard Irwin} 
D. Wolf of the Kaufmann Depart- 
ment Stores, Inc., and chairman of 
the vendor relations committee of 
the association, announce that a 
study will be started at once of a 
uniform order blank to be used by} 
retailers, which will be presented 
for consideration at the annual 
meeting in January of the NRDGA. 
Dr. Charles F, Roos, president 
of the Econometric Institute, pre-| 
dicted that the post-war price level | 
would not show marked change} 
either way, but would show a| 
gradual downward drift. Dr. W. Y. 
Elliott, vice chairman for civilian 
requirements of the War Produc- 
tion Board, told the luncheon ses- 
sion that cotton textile and leather} 
shortages will continue for a con- 
siderable time after victory in 
Europe, and warned against poor/for construction of authorized 
timing of exports of essential) commercial, industrial and agri- 
goods, before domestic pipelines) ayjtyral products. 
are adequately filled. | As a result of its action, taken 
Lew Hahn, general manager of|/in an amendment to Controlled 
the association, reported that plans! Materials Plan Regulation No. 6 
are being developed by the associa-| contractors will be able to use the 
tion for expansion of its merchan-| following which heretofore have 
dising division. |been either prohibited altogether 


Outlines OPA Plans or sharply restricted: 


ae ag —_ Steel plate, aluminum, metal 
cane Ney, in outlining the OPA/jatn and certain building com- 
ans said: 


Sas dn eentiidite Clint we wit | ponents such as hardware, plumb- 
Ko nes — ~ A an Rh gcse ~-aiil ing and heating items, and other 
eas un velop an cver-i[partemanutactured trom tec 

te eg yn. sn’t| : 

| sheet or strip, or fro oO , 
mean that we have abandoned the! Oey ee epee 


attempt to improve price controls Scope of Order 
at retail. 

“This piecemeal approach has| p} 
its disadvantages, obviously, but it ized on Form GA-1456, which is 
also has some advantages. We! used to approve most commercial, 
can adopt the method to fit the/ industrial and agricultural building 
case, and we don’t have to employ | controlled by Conservation Order 
elaborate new controls on items | L.-41, the basic construction order. 
for which existing controls are; ‘The agency also disclosed that 
fairly adequate. lrestrictions on the use of lumber 

Mr. Ney expressed hope that, by) ¢or building construction have been 
more effective controls at manu-| simplified to eliminate 
facturing and distributive levels, ments that builders obtain 
“excessive apparel prices can be | ted lumber from local wood lots 
brought more nearly into line,” 5, by the resawing of larger, less 


AY 
James A. Stewart 


| 
j 





Steel Plate, Aluminum, Metal 
Lath, Hardware, Plumbing 
Listed—Other Agency Action 


Special to Taz New York Times. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 — The 
War Production Board eased today 








The revised restrictions are ap- 


pany’s research, experimental, new| 


MORE CURBS EASED 
ON CIVILIAN OUTPUT 


icable to all construction author-| 


require-| 
permit-| 





|Elected to Directorate 


CANCEL CONTRACTS (ected to Directorate 
WORTH 21 BILLIONS 


‘Armed Forces Ready to End 


AIRCRAFTS FAVORED 


IN SPOTTY ADVANCE 


‘Headway Toward Recovery Is 








$20,000,000,000 More After 
VE-Day, Hinckley Reports 


‘NEW ARMY, NAVY POLICY ‘a = | 


| j | 
" ¢ | 





| 

They Agree on Joint Rules and 

| Forms to Simplify and 
Speed Settlements 








Special to Tus New York Times. 

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—Rob- 
ert H. Hinckley, director of con- 
tract settlement, said in his first 
report to Congress today that con- 
tracts covering items valued at 
$21,000,000,000 had been canceled 
by the Army, Navy and Maritime 
Commission, and that victory in 
Europe would result in termina- 
\tions exceeding $20,000,000,000, or 


}about one-third of the outstanding 
| war production program. 


A, Benson 
Kay-Hart 


Philip 


Philip A. Benson, president of 
the Dime Savings Bank of Brook- 
llyn, was elected yesterday a di- 
Walter Rothschild, president, an- 
nounced. Mr. Benson is a past 
| president of the American Bankers 
| Association, a member of the 
'Council of New York University, 
] trustee and vice president of the 
At the same time, the Army and | Long Island College of Medicine 
|the Navy announced a new joint/ang a director of the Brooklyn 
|termination regulation. The serv-| Institute of Arts and Sciences. He 
ices have agreed on one set of rules|;, also a trustee of the Savings 
and forms designed to simplify and| fjnk Trust Company, vice presi- 
expedite the procedure of contract/ gent of the Brooklyn Chamber of 
| settlement and disposition of prop-|Commerce and a member of the 


| erty. New York Banking Board. 
Mr. Hinckley reported that the ow Sages Sees Seer 


|cancellations ordered by the three} ~ 


}principal wartime procurement 
agencies involved 37,000 prime 
contracts. The cancellations oc- 
curred while production generally 
was being brought to a peak and ARK RUNNING WELL 
maintained and, therefore, repre- 
sented a transfer of manpower and 
|facilities from one type of war 
production to another. a ae ae ie 
The value of termination for all| ’ : . 
agencies, the report said, is only Operating Profits Also in the 
7 per cent of the over-all war pro- 
\gram commitments of $325,000,-|Same Category, Head of R. H. 
000,000, of which $240,000,000,000 
already have been produced. Macy & Co. Reports 
Mr. Hinckley said that, accord- 
|ing to the best available estimates, 
|}most of the terminations resulting 
|from victory in. Europe would come! 











Despite the continued difficulty 


| Production of civilian goods will be|all the operating companies of 
|speeded by prompt settlement of|p yy Macy & Co., Inc., “are run- 


terminated contracts, he indicated.|_. stidelamcal 
“Experience with contract settle ping well both from the viewpoint 


en Mr. Hinckley said, “shows|0f sales and operating profits,” 
be the challenge of mass termi-|Jack I. Straus, the president, in- 
nations can be met. The War and|formed stockholders yesterday at 
ltime Commission have already |e annual meeting. 
= y “op ’ , , 
jsettled 28,000 terminations. These Bamberger’s is showing encour- 
involved items valued at $9,000,-|aging results,” he said. “This has 
|000,000 and were settled by pay-|been aided by improvement in 
|ment of $340,000,000. Recently the|management and some relief in 
average time required for settle-|their transit situation. Our other 
ment has been reduced consider-|subsidiaries are maintaining their 
ably. previous trends.” 
“Tt is clear, therefore, that con-| 
version from war to peacetime pro- 
}duction need not be delayed by 
jcontract settlement, particularly 
|when adequate financing and 
prompt plant clearance is provided 
pending settlement of claims.” 
The purpose and scope of the 
new joint termination regulation 
were outlined in a statement issued 
|by Secretary of the Navy Forres- 
jtal and Robert P. Patterson, Under- 
Secretary of War, which said: 
“The joint termination regula- 
on now issued by the War and 
y Departments seeks to pro- 


\sibly at its most critical stage and 
is likely to continue for some 
montks because of increasing mili- 
tary needs, Mr. Straus declared. 
He added that the Government had 
begun to authorize resumption of 
production of certain durable 
oods. 

“This is important to us,” he ex- 
plained, “because our over-all as- 
sortment performance has tradi- 
tionally been supported by large 
sales in the durable goods field.” 

Mr. Straus discussed also the 
shortage of _ skilled personnel 








| 
| 


ti 
| Nav 


rector of Abraham & Straus, Inc.,| 


The shortage in textiles is pos-| 


Made by Stocks as Volume 
Expands Slightly 


INCENTIVES ARE VARIED) 


Churchill’s View on Duration. 


of War, Dividends, Earnings | 


|cles were incredulous, however, one 


ines WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. [> 


os + B U s I N ESS WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 194. The New Pork g 


INA 





Customers’ B 


rokers S een Involved 


In Kickback Racket in Stock Deals 


| Assistant Attorney General Rutenberg Says 
Barred Over-Counter Dealer Revealed 
Arrangement to Split Overcharges 


Assistant State Attorney Gen- 
eral John W. M. Rutenberg de- 
clared yesterday that the Attorney 
General's office was investigating 
a “kickback racket in Wall Street,” 
which would involve at least seven 
customers’ brokers. Financial medi 


|official of the New York Stock 





Are Cited as Factors 


The stock market’s effort at re- 
covery made some headway yester- 
day, but the advance was spotty. 
iThe widest gains were in the air- 


craft division. Buying of these se- 
curities seemed to have been in- 
spired by Prime Minister Church- 
ill’s prediction of a longer war than 
had been anticipated recently. 
|Strength in individual issues in 
jother sections stemmed from spot 
jcorporate developments such as 
|dividends and earnings. The session 
lended a month characterized by 
sudden shifts of sentiment. 

| Business on the Stock Exchange 
lexpanded slightly, due to the ac- 
|tivity in the aircrafts and the vol- 
jume reached 676,210 shares, com- 
|pared with 604,997 on Monday. 

The market generated only a 
slow-moving recovery in the morn- 
ing period although the aircrafts 
moved forward with force and 
gains reached more than 2 points 
in Douglas. Steels were improved 
also, with bursts of strength in in- 
dividual issues such as Golé@ and 
|Stock Telegraph and Certain-teed 
|Products preferred. The firm tone 
|held in the early afternoon. Grum- 
man shot ahead, although National 
Distillers softened in active deal- 
ings. When volume lightened in 
ithe final hour the aircrafts con- 
tinued to hold higher but sagging 
| tendencies appeared in the indus- 
trials. 

Douglas made a new high of 
72%. Grumman, also at a new 
top, added 1% and Lockheed ad- 
vanced 1% points to its previous 
|peak, Curtiss-Wright, the market 


| several restrictions on materials| within three months of V-E day.|of obtaining some consumer goods, leader in volume, was only slightly 


higher, while United was the lone 
laggard in the section. 

Steels were improved by frac- 
tions with U. S. Steel up % point 
on the day and off the same for 
the month. The directors voted the 
usual dividend of $1 a share on the 
common after the close of trading 
and reported earnings about in line 
with expectations in Wall Street. 
The oils were mixed with Texas 
| Pacific Land Trust again traded 
jin volume and at a price increase 
of % point. National Distillers 
gave way a point but closed with 
a net loss of % point. 

J. C. Penney sagged more than 
a point but Sears Roebuck and 
Montgomery Ward added approxi- 
mately as much. Eastman Kodak 
rose 2 points on a few transfers. 
In the specialties section, Gold & 
|Stock Telegraph climbed 9 points 
ito a new high of 139, while Cer- 
tain-teed Products preferred ad- 
vanced 2% points. A few of the 
rails showed modest improvements, 
and the rubbers and motors closed 
mixed. 

The rail component of THE NEW 
YORK TIMES index was up 0.25 
point to 31.15, but a dip of 0.06 in 
section to 172.83 


Exchange asserting that, without 
attempting to prejudge a case still 
under investigation, those familiar 
with the business could hardly help 
looking upon it as an isolated in- 
stance. 

According to Mr. Rutenberg, he 
discovered the secret kickback ar- 
rangement while investigating the 
affairs of William F. Moore, an 
over-the-counter securities dealer 
of 2 Rector Street who, he said, 
had been indicted for embezzling 
clients’ funds and had pleaded 
guilty to attempted grand larceny 
in the first degree. Moore, he said, 
had received a suspended sentence 
/on his promise to make restitution, 
but was enjoined on Oct. 5 from 
|doing further business in securities 
e this State. 

Moore, said Mr. Rutenberg, de- 
clared that he had a secret ar- 
rangement with Alfred Henry Nol- 
man, then a customers’ broker for 
a New York Stock Exchange 


UNILITY SECURITIES 
ON MARKET TODAY 


Metropolitan Edison Bonds 
and Stock to Be Offered 
by Separate Groups 


Two underwriting syndicates will 


$24,500,000 of 2% per cent bonds, 
due in 1974, and 125,000 shares of 
3.90 per cent cumulative preferred 
istock of. the Metropolitan Edison 
Company. 

A group headed by Mellon Secu- 
jrities Corporation will offer the 
bonds at 10134, while a syndicate 
jheaded by Smith, Barney & Co., 
and Goldman, Sachs & Co. will 
market the preferred stock at 
|102% a share, plus accrued div- 
idends from Oct. 1, 1944. 
| These securities were awarded 
ito the respective banking groups 
jat a competitive sale held on Mon- 
|day. 

Proceeds from the sale of both 
the bonds and the preferred stock, 
|with $9,049,000 to be received from 
lthe NY PA NJ Utilities Company, 
the parent concern, and other 
funds of the company, will be ap- 
plied to the redemption of $51,150,- 
1663 of outstanding securities. 

The new preferred stock will be 
iredeemable on thirty days’ notice 
at 105% and accrued dividends. 

The company operates exclusive- 
ly in Pennsylvania. 

Associated with Mellon Securi- 
ties Corporation in the offering of 
ithe bonds are: Blyth & Co., Inc.; 
Kidder, Peabody & Co.; Lazard 





house. Mr. Rutenberg said that a 
bank bought securities for its cus- 
tomers through the Stock Ex- 
change house which employed Nol- 
man, and that Nolman, handling| 
the deals, would fill some of them | 
with Moore, whereupon Moore! 
would charge prices “which were 
out of line with the market” and} 
split thousands of dollars of profits) 
with Nolman, giving the latter 40) 
to 60 per cent. 

Mr. Rutenberg made the charges 
in seeking an injunction to restrain 
Nolman from engaging in the se- 
curities business. Nolman consent- 
ed. to the injunction, which was 
granted by Supreme Court Justice 
Benjamin F. Schreiber, but denied 
“any and all allegations of fraud 
or fraudulent practices contained 
in the compiaint.” 

In a later statement Mr. Ruten- 
berg said the Stock Exchange was 


cooperating with his investigation.|\day. The figures compared 


| 


NCIAL 


U,S.STEEL'S COSTS. 
OFFSET SALES RISE 


New Record Made in Billings 
for Nine Months, but Profits 
Drop to $1.22 a Share 


DIVIDEND OF $1 DECLARED 


Federal Income Tax Provision 
Is $74,000,000—467 Work 
Stoppages This Year 


Products and services soid 
the United States Steel Co 
ticn for the first nine 
1944 set a new high record 
$1,535,783,742 for the period, wit! 


steel shipments at a peak of 15 
864,466 net tons, Irving S. Olds, 
the chairman, announced yester- 


by 
rvor2 


rpora- 


montis 


He did not name the bank which/$1,446,647,355 and 15,069,644 tons 


handled its clients’ security pur-|respectively, 
| Period last year. 


chases in this manner or the Stock 
Exchange house by which Nolman 
was employed until Oct. 14. 

“This investigation seeks to 
weed out the few undesirable em- 
ployes of Stock Exchange houses 
so that the public confidence will 
not be undermined in the thou- 
sands of honest workers in Wall 
Street,” Mr. Rutenberg declared. 


CLOSE BIDS MADE 
FOR 2 BOND ISSUES 


Nine Banking Groups Compete 
for $47,402,000 of New 
Utility Securities 


—_— —— 


Two new issues of bonds of pub- 


offer for:aally today to the public|lic utility companies, aggregating |the nine months of 


| $30,481,000, were sold at competi- 
tive saleg here yesterday. The 
offerings consisted of $16,981,000 


of Potomac Edison Company’s first 
mortgage 3 per cent bonds, due in 
1974, and $13,500,000 of California 
Oregon Power Company’s first 
mortgage bonds, due on Nov. 1, 
1974. 

Close bidding on the part of nine 
banking groups marked the sales. 
The Potomac Edison Company re- 
ceived five syndicate bids for its 
issue, with a group headed by 
W. C. Langley & Co. receiving the 
award on a bid of 101.402 for the 
$16,981,000 bonds with an interest 
rate of 3 per cent. The Langley 
syndicate expects to reoffer the 
bonds, subject to formal award 
and approval by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission, at 1024. 

Other bids for the Potomac Elec- 
tric issue were from groups head- 
ed respectively by Kidder, Peabody 
& Co., 101.139; Halsey, Stuart & 
iCo., Inc., 100.789; Lehman Broth- 
ers, 100.079, and Mellon Securities 
Corporation, 100.5911. 

Halsey, Stuart Co., Inc., and as- 
sociates were the successgul bid- 
ders for the $13,500,000 of Cali- 
fornia Oregon Power Company's 
bonds, receiving the award on their 


in the same 1943 


yesterday 


Aw 
avi 


| The directors ordered 

ithe usual common stock 

lof $1 a share, payable on De 
holders of record of Nov. 10 

ithe regular quarterly 

| dividend of $1.75 a share 

ion Nov. 20 to holders of 

| Nov. 3. 

The $89,100,000 increase in sales 
;was more than offset by higher 
employment costs, added costs of 
purchased products and services, 
and other increased costs, Mr. Olds 
said. 
| Net profit for the third quarter 
lof 1944 was $16,924,356, which was 


dend 
5 
2 
nreferred 
payable 


record 
recora 


equal, after preferred dividends, to 
| $1.22 a common share. It compared 
|with $15,354,917, or $1.04 a share, 
in the previous quarter, and with 
| $19,166,596, or $1.48 a share, i 
|third quarter of 1943 

For the nine months ended 
iSept. 30 net profit was $49.3 
889, or $3.49 a share, against $* 
252,649, or $3.60 a share, reported 
for the 1943 period. However, t 
jcurrent year’s revenues were 34.- 
945,760 less than the for 
1943 adjuste 


nm for in 
mh ior in 


- 


income 
4 
Ir @ 


jto the annual provisio 
| taxes. 


Post-War Reserve Fund 
rided 


~# 


The corporation prov 
ithird-quarter earnings 36,000,000 
jadditional as estimated costs aris- 
ing out of the war, the same as a 
}year ago, and for nine months the 
jtotal was $18,000,000, as 943 
|This brought to about $92,000 
[the post-war reserves accumulated 
|by the corporation 
|} At the year-end United 
Steel and subsidiaries ll ha 
funded debt slightly under $106 
000,000, the lowest amount 
years, giving effect to the retire- 
ment of $27,500,000 of serial 
|bentures today and to « 
reductions. Capital expendit 
for additions to and betterments 
\fixed assets in quarte 
}amounted to $11,100,000, with $6 
|000,000 unexpended balances f 
lfuture additions available 
Sept. 30. 

Net current assets < 
|were $586,631,746, compared ' 
$575,515,492 the year bef 

Federal income tax 
for the third quarter were $2 
000,000, bringing the total f 
months to $74,000,000, against $79. - 
500,000 in the first nine months of 


s 
iii 


4 


States 


wi ave 


in Many 


‘ 


t ther 


+h - 
vil 


n Ser 
re 
ns 


nrovi«e 
Ds : 


r nine 


but was not too sure of what can | critical sizes. Former restrictions vide 


be done about shifts by manufac-|o, electrical installations uniform and workable tools the industrial 


“which prevails in the face of con-| 
als0/for carrying out the threefold pur- P 


nator : : Freres & Co.; Union Securities Cor- 
tinuing high purchasing power in 


limited the increase in the com- bid of 101.70 for 3%s. It is expect-| 1943. 


turers from lower to higher price! pave been changed to a single 
lines. jhibition against installation of 
Discussing merchandising effects! wire and conduit of larger sizes 
of the recent Bankhead amend-| than the minimums required by 
ment to the Stabjlization Act, MY. | the 1940 electrical code. 
Ney said “fortumately, we don’t) 
believe that the major portion of| 
the price increases granted to the; Other announcements by war 
textile mills will ever reach the agencies of interest to business 
retailer,” adding converters “can| included: 
fairly be required to absorb these | EXPORTS: Foreign traders were 
increases. jadvised today that, effective Jan. 1, 
OPA, Mr. Ney continued, is now ved ~~ commodity groups, 
rogking Aa, inis jiece|Chemicals, iron and iron yroducts, 
be we ng ent — shew "we and non-ferrous metals and miscel- 
goods regulation whic wi M-|janeous minerals, will be removed 
crease substantially more low-|from the decentralization procedure, 
price goods, and will reduce the | which requires exporters to submit 
prices of goods whose finishing preference request recommendations 
re unchanged. 


with applications for licenses to ex- 
port to Brazil. After Jan. 1 the only 
Byres H. Gitchell, who recently |commodities subject to the procedure 
resigned as director of the con-/|are coal and coke; steel, carbon and 
sumer goods price division of the| soy. wood and wood manufactures, 
OPA, outlined OPA policy on cost/ ang other commodities will also still 
absorption and explained tempo-| 
rary open pricing of some textile) Continued on Page 34, Column 2 
goods because of increases required |= 
under the Bankhead amendment are} 
not favored by OPA and will be re-| 
placed by exact determination of! 
price increases as soon as possible, | 
which, with reference to towels, is} 


due this week. | 
| 


pro- 


Other Agency Moves 


STOCKS 


Net 
Low Last. Chge 
20 89 11.15 + .25 
172.55 172.83 06 
101.72 101.99 10 
STOCKS 
101 89 
102.04 
101.96 
~+ 102.24. 101.47 101.67 
102.49 101.99 102.21 
02.63 101.87 102.40 
MONTHLY RANGE OF 50 STOCKS 


High 

25 railroads 41.23 
25 industrials 173.58 
50 stocks 102.40 
DAILY RANGE OF 50 
102.18 101,63 

101.94 

101.41 


Uniform Order Blank 


The standard uniform order 
blank for retailers on a voluntary 
basis was made known for the/Oct 
time at the meeting. . Mr. rv 
Wolf said many of the forms were aes ; 
outmoded, leading to “skyhook as-|Oct. 2 
sociations” in some manufacturing | 
lines, which framed opposing rules| 
detrimental to retailers. 

Mr. Wolf, indicating 
committee would study 
forms between now and January, 


¢ 


15 
O08 
.29 
54 
19 
10 


first 


Ne 
High. Date. Low. Date. Last. Chge 
. 101.41 27 101.99 — 18 
Sept 98.71 14 
that a Aug. . 4 100.65 
order | July 101.40 24 
June ... 98.16 
May ... 95.10 
93.96 
94.04 
92.79 
92.23 


102.17 
102.17 
101.92 
103.22 


+ .25 


+3.98 
99.24 +4.16 
95.08 —2.07 
97.15 +2.78 
94.37 — 07 
94.44 +1.96 


89.02 1 92.48 +3.44 
88.70 30 89.04 —6.26 
YEARLY RANGE OF 50 STOCKS 
High. Date Low, Date 
105.26 July 14 92.21 Jan 
102.01 July 15 82.31 Jan 
FULL YEARS 
Higt Date Low. Date 
..102.01 July 15 82.31 Jan. 8 
. 83.T% Dec, 28 64.13 Apr. 29 
+++ 96.60 Jan. 10 74.95 Dec. 23 78.13 
-.111.78 Jan. 3 82.32 Junel10 93.82 
114.27 Sep. 13 84.79 Apr. 1 110.06 
110.74 Nov. 10 68.70 Mar. 31 108.51 


TREASURY 


April 2 


Continued on Page 35, Column 2 |March 
eb 


| Jan 
1943 

Dec 

Nov. 


Last 
3 101.99 
8 95.39 


1944 
11945 


PENSION, BONUS 
AND PROFIT- SHARING 
PLANS 


Our 92-page summary covers 


Last 
1943 2.48 
1942 a3 
1941 
1940 
| 1939 
| 1938 


| 
| 
| 


82.30 


the tundamentals of formulat- 
ing and financing employee 


This Month 


benefit plans. 
$1,803,908 ,710 


Total 
Principal sources: 
| Income tax: 
Withheld by employers (Current 
Tax Payment Act of 1943) 
Other 
Miscellaneous 


Write for your copy today. 


THE CHASE 
NATIONAL BANK 


Or THe Cc TY OF NEW YORK 


Vensson 1 rus Urvssson 
tt Broad Street. New York 45 
| elabbome tiAnover 2-9800 


561,926,694 
594,191,987 
535 962.931 
39 690 983 
25,786,447 


internal revenue 
Employment taxes 
Customs 


EXPENDITURES 


| Total expenditures (excluding pub- 
lic debt retirements 
Principal items 


$7,273,364, 761 
Conservation and Domestic 
llotment Act 
Security Board 

” public debt 
(subtotal) 


1,504,039 

34 456,549 
104,449,431 
6, 787,281,334 


Interest 

| War activities 

|Excess of expenditures (excluding 

| public debt retircments) 5, 509,217,034 
Gross public debt, $209,495,718,547; year a 

Monetary gold, $20,726,500,030; year ago, 
Treasury balance, $10,293,036,686 04. 


MARKET AVERAGES 


Tuesday, Oct. 31, 1944 


|} Oct 


—1.30) 


Special to Tus New Yore Tras. 
WASHINGTON. Oct. 31—Revenue receipts and expenditures, close of business Oct. 28: 
RECEIPTS 


j 


/pose of the Contract Settlement/tne hands of consumers.” 

|Act of 1944: To settle termination 

‘claims fairly and quickly; to clear Expansion Possibilities 
Commenting on acquisition by 


termination inventory from war 
plants promptly, and to prevent/the Da™fison-Paxon Company, the 
Atlanta subsidiary, of a branch 


adequate interim financing. 
| “Negotiation is the mainspring|store in Augusta, Ga., he said all 
the operating properties were ex- 


jof settlement. This must be kept 

jin mind constantly in applying the|ploring similar possibilities and 
(detailed provisions of the regula-|preparing to make improvements 
tion.” ¢ 

| Much of the procedure in the 
|jnew regulation is identical with 
|practices that have been in force| ticipate an interim post-war period 
|for some time, but considerable|in which the transition to a civilian 
|additional authority has been dele-| economy may provide disturbing 
gated both to contractors and tojand difficult dislocations,’ Mr. 
|field representatives of contract-|Straus commented, “we must de- 
ling agencies. Contractors can|pend upon it that American busi- 
|now make final settlement with|ness and American Government 
|their subcontractors of net claims|will minimize these shocks and 
junder $1,000 where the claimant/that we may look forward to an 
‘keeps or disposes of all termina-|expanded and effective peacetime 


tion inventory. economy.” 
Lieut. Col. Theodore S. Faller, 


when conditions allowed. 
“While we may reasonably an- 


corporate controller under Edwin 
F. Chinlund, vice president. J. Karl 
Fishback, assistant corporate con- 
troller, will remain in that position. 


Joseph J. Thursh, acting vice presi- 
SSE DM OM. 29.95\dent of Macy's New York, has 
25 INDUSTRIALS |been appointed controller. 
Low, Date. Last.| Thomas M. Green, formerly with 
ede jae & iseas|Breed, Abbott & Morgan, has 
: joined the executive staff as gen- 
ware eral attorney for the corporation 
100-60 104 9381 + 16 9043 412 and for Macy’s New York. As an 
RANGE OF DOMESTIC BoNps |#SSistant secretary he will be in 
05.50 + 06iOct. 28... 06.18 — goicharge of the legal department of 
95.24 + 1lOct. 25... 95.47 + .04|/the corporate offices. He succeeds 
9.13 — 05!Oct. 24. 95.43 ~ 03 lin this position Patrick L. Ryan, 
YEARLY RANGE OF DOMESTIC BONDS [whose retirement on Jan. 1 had 
High. Date Low. Date. Last.| been announced. d 


95.77 Oct. 88.34 J a - . 
; $7.50 Oct. 2 78 Hr Jan 87 ° Officers and directors were re- 
elected. 


STOCK SPLIT-UP PLANNED 


YEARLY RANGE OF 25 RAILS 


High Date Low. Date 
32.72 July 10 25.26 Jan 31.15 


| Last 

1944 

| 1943 
YEARLY RANGE OF 


High Date 
178.09 July 14 
174.43 July 15 


DOMESTIC 


2 
2 


1944 
1943 


| 20 Rails 
93.59 +.14 
DAILY 


30 
28 
27 


| Oct 
Oct, 


3 
2 


1944 
11943 


Last. 
66.54 
78.41 
73.90 
75.02 
72.86 
72.04 | 
73.55 | 
90.10 : 
| A special meeting of holders of 
».|¢lass B common stock of the Devoe 
29|& Raynolds Company, Inc., will be 
£3 | held here on Nov, 17 to consider an 
increase in authorized class B com- 
mon stock from 40,000 to 200,000 
shares of no par value and an ex- 
change of five new shares for each 
present share. 
Each class B share would have 
Corr. Perioa |ONe* Vote and each other class of 
ai Roy he | stock would have five votes a shdre 
$12,460.674.747 | in any proceedings in which stocks 
voted as a group and not separate- 
ly by classes. At all other timés 
all shares of any class would have 
one vote a share. 


High. Date Low. Date. 

88.54 Dec, 3 78.54 Jan. 2 

78.60 Oct 74.07 June 22 
72.70 Dec. 10 





67.11 May 22 
68.60 Sept. 1 
68.39 Mar. 31 
72.39 Nov. 24 
84.37 Jan. 2 


73.42 Jan. 
90.74 Jan 
90.21 Oct. 19 2 
tCorresponding day last year 
DOW-JONES STOCK AVERAGES 
147.01 146.12 146.53 
41.67 41.27 41.59 
25.52 25.31 25.40 
53.02 52.64 52.86 


Be Held Here on Nov. 17 


30 industrials 
20 railroads 
15 utilities ....66.. 


65 stocks 


STATEMENT. 


+ 
. 
‘ 

+ 


Fiscal Year 
1945 
$12,802,225,379 


Corr. Period 
Last Year 
$1,960,290 965 


1,767 638,114 
7,083 303,224 
1,996,483 306 
364,992,380 
137,788,271 


526 681,597 
740,423,814 
411,979, 889 
31,765,130 
35,204,049 


2,961, 801,746 
6,166,793,090 
2,562,903 846 
388 605,721 
101,749,850 


D. L. & W. Attorney to Retire 

Austin J. McMahon, 
general counsel of the Delaware, 
Lackawanna & Western Railroad, 
will retire today under the com- 
pany’s pension rules. He has been 
connected with the road's law de- 
partment thirty-five years. 


$6,901,796.731 $31,432,128,100 $29,166,006,076 


16,483,211 
182,439,106 
539,729,696 

27 082,439,921 


17,061 ,855,748 


18,007 ,099 
152,460,758 
848,323,682 

28,556 ,810,375 


47,195,392 
114,740,559 
6,466, 292,522 
4,973,270 .406 19,011,196, 308 


©, $158,349,468,312, 
22,115,535, 687, 


and changes in present properties | 


who has been discharged from the} 
Army, will return to Macy's as| 


| 
assistant} 


bined averages to 0.10 for a closing 
of 101.99. 

Selective gains were scored in 
the bond market with most re- 
served for the rail liens. 





Form Brokerage Concern 
| Samuel and Philip Weinberg 
have formed S. Weinberg & Co, to 
|conduct a general brokerage busi- 
ness in unlisted securities. Samuel 
|Weinberg has been manager of the 
trading department of C. E, de 
eee & Co. 


TOPICS OF THE DAY IN WALL STREET 


| 


Geneva Works 


The United States Steel Corpo-| out of line if a broader range of|of which was supplied by the Re- 


ration has no option to purchase 
the Geneva. Works, erected in Utah 
by the corporation in behalf of the 
Government and operated at no fee 
by United States Steel, nor has it 
discussed purchase of the plant 
jwith the Government, Irving 5. 
Olds, chairman, said 
after the quarterly meeting of di- 
rectors. It is probably the best as 
|well as the most expensive steel 
plant in the country, he said, hav- 
jing been erected under emergency 
conditions to supply West Coast 
|shipyards. Various experts have 
said it would take $30,000,000 to 
$90,000,000 to fit the plant for 
peacetime production, as it now 
can produce only plates and struc- 
tural steel, but Mr. Olds felt that 
if the Government chose to com- 
plete the plant by large additional 
expenditures, it would not be a 
greater inducement to a potential 
buyer. As to whether it and the 
Fontana Works in California have 
icreated an unusable steel surplus 
on the West Coast, he felt it was a 





is now five times the normal con- 
suming capacity for ship plates in 





Summary of the Day 


Stock Exchange 

Stocks closed irregularly high- 
er with aircraft shares leading 
in slightly larger trading; vol- 
ume, 676,210 shares. 

Bonds closed mixed with 
selected issues strongest in quiet 
dealings; transactions, $6,119,- 
900. 

Curb Exchange 

Stocks closed irregularly high- 
er; 209,630 shares traded 

Bonds closed’ steady; 
$572,000. f 

Foreign Exchange 

Canadian free dollar 
slightly lower. 

Commodity Futures 

Wheat was steady, but other 
grains declined; cotton was ir- 
regular. 


sales, 





yesterday) 


poration; White, Weld & Co.; E. H. 
Rollins & Sons, Inc.; Eastman, Dil- 
lon & Co.; Harris, Hall & Co., Inc.; 
F. S. Moseley & Co.; Salomon 
Brothers & Hutzler; Shields & Co. 
and Tucker, Anthony & Co. 
Associated with Smith, Barney 
& Co. and Goldman, Sachs & Co. 
lin the offering of the preferred 
|stock are: Lehman Brothers; Spen- 
lcer Trask & Co.; H. M. Byllesby & 
|Co., Inc.: A. G@. Becker & Co., Ine.; 
|Blair & Co., Inc.; Equitable Securi- 


Continued on Page 33, Column 4 





| the Western steel mills, but the in- 
; got capacity would not be too far 


steel products could be made at 
these mills. 


Nickel Plate Refunding 


| The refunding operation of the 
New York, Chicago & St. Louis 
tailroad, the Nickel Plate, has 
progressed to a point where it may 


of the 
Under the plan the Nickel 
|Plate will redeem its $26,100,000 
of 54 per cent bonds of 1974, 
1$6,500,000 of Toledo, St. Louis & 
| Western 4 per cent bonds and re- 
pay a $10,000,000 bank loan which 
lit recently arranged. The proceeds 
from a $42,000,000 bond issue ma- 
turing in thirty years and bearing 
an interest rate of around 3% per 
cent will be used, together with 
cash in the treasury, to redeem 
the bonds and repay the loan. The 
proceeds of the bank loan, plus 
about $5,000,000 in cash, will be 
lused to redeem on Nov. 24 $15,- 
188,000 of 3% per cent bonds due 


| pletion 
| drive. 





Devoe & Raynolds Meeting to| matter of types of products; there|in 1947, 


Tennessee Gas 


The Tennessee Gas and Trans- 
jmission Company yesterday started 
the flow of natural gas through its 
/1,265-mile pipe-line from the Texas 
lpas field to the Pittsburgh district. 
iConstruction of the line, which 
crosses seven States, was under- 
ltaken as an emergency measure 
jupon orders from the War Pro- 
iduction Board and the Federal 
|Power Commission. Starting near 
Corpus Christi, Texas, it termi- 
inates at Cornwell, W. Va., and ties 
into the Columbia Gas and Electric 
Corporation and Hope Natural Gas 
Company systems. When in full 
operation, it will deliver 200,000,- 
000 cubie feet of gas daily, to be 
divided between the Columbia and 
Hope system. Many sections of the 
line have been tested under 800 
}pounds of pressure and final tests 
jare under way. Gas for the line is 
jbeing supplied by the Chicago 
|Corporation, which owns or con- 
trols reserves of more than two 


be undertaken soon after the com-| 
Sixth War Loan! 


}ed that the bonds will be reoffered| Employment by the corporat 
) at 102.86, subject to SEC approval. | averaged 313,277 in the third quar- 
~ ter. compared with 344,093 in 
1943 period. Mr. Olds said eurrent 
steel production by t! 2 
was less than 94 per 


Baer Appointed Distilling Trustee 
Theodore G. Baer of Peoria,| 
|Ill., has been appointed by a Fed-| ~~ 
eral Court in that State to be |°#Pacity, against 94%, 
trustee of the distribution of the| “ek, 4n average of 93.3 per 
liquor inventory of the American |f°F the third quarter and 95.1 per 
Distilling Company to stoeckhold- cent for nine month 1944 
ers. He succeeds Gilbert B. Gei-| The reduction the operat 
ger, who died Oct. 19, and has of- | "ate of the corporation and 
fices in the Lehman Building, Peo- | 
lria. 


per cent 





s of 
on . 


Continued on Page 34, Columa 


—SPECIALISTS 


| trillion cubic feet jn Texas. The _— 
line cost about $54,000,000, much 


construction Finance Corporation. 


United States 
Government 
Securities 


Investment Policies 


In recent months the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York has! 
|been conducting a poll on invest- 
|ment policies among officers of 
|the member banks of the second 
district. It has found that most of 
them emphasize a strong liquid 
‘position by keeping a large share 
lof their assets in short-term Gov- 
ernment securities and by planning 
icarefully spaced maturities in their 
linvestment portfolios. This gen- 
erally shared policy, the bank said 
lin its review, “has important im- 
'plications for the post-war period,” 
japparently indicating that the 
Federal Reserve System, despite 
forebodings in some quarters, may 
be able to control the post-war 
money market after all. Bankers 
feels, said the survey, that deposit 
llosses can be met by disposing 
lonly of shorter-term securities. 
Another point in the survey is that 
New York City banks, which have 
made relatively small wartime 
gains in deposits, expect to gain 
in the post-war period, when most 
banks expect to lose. 





C. J. DEVINE2 CO. 


48 WALL STREET NEW YORK 5, N.Y 
Chicago - Boston - Philadelphia-Pittsburgh | 
Cleveland + Cincinnati « St. Lewis 


San Francisco 


Arbitrage Spreads 





Chicago, Rock Island & 
Pacific Rwy. Co. 


Denver & Rio Grande 
Western R. R. Co. 18°, 


Seaboard Airline Rwy. Co. 
* 13%, 


21%, 


Stock Exchange Leaders 


Net 

Volume. Last. Ch'ge 
. 27,300 
17,300 
.12,900 
12, A00 
.11,600 
11,500 
10,300 
.10,100 
9,200 
7,900 
7,200 
7,000 
. 7,000 
5,900 

5,900 


Curtiss-Wright 
Tex Pag Ld Tr. 
Grumman Airc. 
Link Belt 
Int Tel & Tel.. 
Cons Vultee 
Aviation Corp.. 
Am & For Pow. 
Graham-Paige . 
Lockheed Airc... 
Nat Distill 
Chi & N 
Bell Aire : 
Boeing Airp..... 
Martin G. L..... 

Is- Ad De 

sues vances clines. Highs Lows 
Yesterday ..846 385 192 28 ; 
Oct, 30. 817 204 399 24 
Oct. 28 615 293 125 14 


Chicago, Indianapolis & 
Louisville Railway Co. 19°. 
We will discount 
profits 


Western Pacific R 


(when 


ssuec 


SUTRO BROS. & CO. 


Members New York Stock Exchange 
120 Broadway, New York 


Telephone RE ctor 2-7340 





BONDS AND SHARES | TRANSACTIONS ON THE NEW YORK _STOCK EXCHANGE 


Range 1944. Stock and Div’d Sls. Net Range 1944. Stock and Div’d Sis. Net | Range 1944. Stock and Divd SI Sis. ee a 3 
igh. Low in Dollars 100s st. High. . Last. Choe. TUESDAY, OCT. 31, 1944 High. Low. in Dollars, 100s. First. » High. . Low. b Last. Chge. /High. Low. in Dollars, 100s. First. High. Low. Last. Chge. = Wi h E h ] t t 
641% 5212 ABBOTT LB 1.60 12 > 601% : @=- & Sales unofficial. ———Year to Date——— 103% [ 65% Interlake Iron 35g Se my % 85, 8% nn | _ 834 RAD CPofAM .20e 25 ~ 103% “10% 1014 it an ye on t e n eres $ 


934 8V, ACF Br 5 85— Day's Sales Monday Year Ago 1944 1943 181 1547, Int Bus Mach 6a. 4.175 175 173%, 174 — 1¥|| 10%— 7% Radio-Keith-Orph 18 Sig 83_ 8% 
Acme Stl 3a ‘ 65 676,210 604 997 Holiday 213.795.3149 240.969.0904 | 82 6734 Int Harvester 2.60 10 7735 77g 77%q 77%—e— a B5¥_ RKO pf 6.......1280 89 89% 89 


Announcem f ar| 13% 10% Adams Exp 1Se. 7 12 12% 12 12%+ %% hiked : ; 175% 165 Int Marvest pf 7t 1178 175 175 175 .. || 16% 8 RRSec Ii Cen Stk 2 13% 1334 13% - . 
ement o Cheaper War Us 1914 Addressog-Mult i 2336 ? 233, % : 1% 134 Int Hydro-Elec A S 3M BW Bye Te. 13Vq 28i4q Raybstos-Man 1% 2 324 3204 32M%q 0 an § an ot er nstitutions 
Financing Lends Strength 37% Air Reduction la j 5834 T = - — ~-4-—-e 1834 15% Int Min & Ch Ye 24 173, 18 173g 18 +1 | ‘8 12% Rayonier Inc 1534 15% 1534 2 
‘ i'> 75 Ala & Vcks 6...? f 88 — 1 } | | | } | ; 78 865 = Int Min & Ch of 2 77Vq 77Vq 77Vq T7Vg .. || 34¥q 28 Rayonier Inc pf2. 33% 3: 33% 3 
a I I I I aa | | 6% 414 Int Mining ..... 5 5 5 5 + 20V— 15¥2 Reading Co 1... 17 17 


75 4\5 Alaska Junea : 612 — I ] | 
to Gilt-Edge Issues 2” Alleghany Corp .. § 2, NEW YORK TIMES |__|. - = 321% 25% Int Nick Can 1.60 2 30% 30%, 30 30 — %4)| 70  SOVZReis (R) & Col pf160 62% 62%, 62 : 
| | j 2 y 22g 14% Reming Randl.20at 7 207% 20% 


ACTI THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. STOCK EXCHANGE 
il " 





a HAL 


o You KNow that we are uniquely qualified to 
ce cove Aiepany os : 28\a+ oe 136 130 Int Nick Can pf7t 40 135¥9 13512 134% 134¥%)— 1 | 


| 583, 37 Allegha yer pf. 1 S08 | 5053+ 50 COMBINED STOCKS Be oe 2034 13M Int Paper ...... 13 19% 198— 193_ 1939+ Ma}}100 7O0¥2 Rens&.Saratoga st 1 99 4 9 serve banks and all! other institutions in deal- 
\ 7 » . | 2934 2414 Alles Lud Stl 7 2 2 28\94 ; t ! i } | | 891— 66 Int Pap pfS...... 8 89 B91, 8834 89 o I 4 Reo Motors Ye.. 3 13 1234 . 2 : i n-, . — . 
By Wireless to Tur New York Times | 1534 914 Al Indust 3, 2 14% d Boas . ; ; = ae EE : 121 734 Int Ry Cen Am.. 1 WW % %% Me “tal | 2m 4 4 f ie: x ite tie iste 18 ing with many phases of their security market 
LONDON. Oct. 31 3 ress in| 15278141 Al Chen &Dye 151% 151% 2 1512+ oe . 92 68% Int Ry C Apfilgkt 20 83% aite 825, 825—— 134) 2 4 Repub Sti cv p 3V2 2 103% 10312... rae 
p tort agpenagedtion if Ee) oF 13 “ lr \—| j{~—!—] 1934 115g Int Tel & Tel....116 169, 1634 1612 165.— Wa||101%2 87 | Rep Steet pf A 6 3 100% 101 | 100%4 101 activities: 


today’s stock markets generally 141 Allied Str 197% 203, 19% 203+ ! 1214 634 Revere Cop & Br. 11Yy 11% Li's : : ‘def doe of 
lit , 17 «17 | 15% 10 Reynolds Met ye 1 15. 15. 15 mo We offer nationwide facilities and knowledge of afl 


( 1 lied ' > " 1 . 
Was on a small scale }103 964 Allied St 5 1012 101%2 101% 1814 13%4 JARVIS(WB) .%90e ae 
| 4058 35%8 Al Mtg 6 57a 385g 27 Jewel Tea la 343g 347%q 343q J47a+ Sa)| 9902 B52 Reyn M pf S¥2.t 4 3 = ; types of securities and markets; in particular, our In- 

33% 13% 133% : 


Giltedge issues displayed in-/118, 103 “Allis Ch ME M2 112 oe See. ae 112” 10734 Jewel Tea pf 4¥. 1212 112. 112 112 Be 4A 

ased « re — . 2o4 73g Alpha P Cem , 2 21% 21% 2 ; ns 2 3 % 313 | se 2 eyn To 
creased streng as ; f th 8 p 1 21% 21 2 . 3434 3114 Johnson & J .20 31% 3134 31% 4+ 28 
reased strength as . re sult of the 4 2 A athe: ee | 3 i5q t t fly t ; ; } 108% 10734 Johnson & J pt 41 10814 1081/2 10814 108194 || 19% '3 Rheem Mfg 1... 
announcement by the Chancellor | 11034 d rada Pet 1012 2 101% i a K j | | 101 845 Johns-Manv 1¥e.. 9534 14 9534 %. “ re ay Ay Vas. 2 2 
‘ . ; , ‘ ale 21,,| t¥2 26 AmAg C D 1-20a 1 27¥ 2 27 2714 205g Jones & L Sti 2 24\q 243g 24Yg 24 i” f g Roan Ant Cop 2 7 
of the Exchequer that sales of 2! | $434 i ; } 8014 : 801 t } | i 74 . 58 "Fa L Stipfas 73a 74 73 73Vo+ || 34% 25 Ruberoid 4Se . 3234 3234 Since the test of anything lies in trying it, we 
per cent National War Bonds will! 68% 00 Am Bank WN pf 3t 6714 6714 67 7 ee ene 87 66% Jones & LStipfBS 82 825 82 825+ %)| 23 145 Rustless 1&S .60a 18 «18 7 wii? é 

suggest that you ascertain what our Institutional! 

Bond Department can do for you. 


eee 


s.. 


a> => ae 31 stitutional bond Department stands ready to supply 
e 46% 3 
9%, 9% ; prompt, efficient coope ration to such organizations. 


Sees 


ee a. 
+2 eRe ew ee 


ne 


be discontinued on Nov. 7 and re-| 1978 ,/34 Am Bosct 15V2 4 2 ; 1742 103, Joy Mfg .80a 163, 163, 163% 1639+ Si¥g 45 Rusti I1&S pf2vt 2 So 


a ‘e vw 4 rr . ‘ 4 a wm © . i 44\ 4 4 | | ] ] | | 
placed by 1M per cent bonds ma-}|j 1261/2 Am B pf Si@.t 30 131 = i a. | a Ja oad los 14% 6% KAN CITY SO .. 934 934 934 934+ | 5334 433g SAFEWAY STRS3 8 52 % 5214 52 
turing in 1950 which will be issued! 14 8 Am Cable 11\% sa "2 2434 20 Kelsey-H ~WhAIi2 “au Mm 2 1s 110%q Safe St 5% pf 5t 70114 114 114 114 
at par. This is the cheapest pub- S5¥2 82 A . 88 - iT | | Tt a = 195g 1319 Kelsey-H WhBIY2 1734 1734 17% 35¥e 2TMq St Joseph Lead 2. 1 343g Jl 34% 
lic war borrowing yet 7 hy Fob ni 7 ' — = + 3524 2034 Kennecott C 1ge 21 343p 348, 34Nq al) 279 7 Savage Arms tee. 2 Th 8 Th 
Textile +93 oc, . : . 4238 7578 Am Cr & fd 2e 3834 . | | | | | 19 Keyst S&W 1.20. 23% 23% 234 i Vg 30 Scheniey Distii 2. 8 332 V2 333g 
exti es were in demand and 92% 6834 a or a Stee 4, 8812 _ ; ss el eK EB aT 31% Kimberly-Clk 1a 36% 36%, 3635 iV Scott Paper 1.80. 2 4 43% 
there were some smal! gains ate rd ay Rok. Ca a + a By ; . +44 +— = 3 Kinney (G R) Co.. 6 6 6 + = jy ~ Oi 1.. 4 21 
Other industrials were quiet but! jj, 144 am cos _ ts ise > 183, 18 = Lisl meatal tee 73 S4¥2 Kinney $5 pf 6k.1 2 12% 72 1644 Servel ay 0 Pr th 
8'2 r ory ug . 1 2 22 «OK OF we ‘ 1 tae <8 
firm 107 101%2 AmC S pf 6....t ‘0 GRSD ane Sane Gees Skat Seek OSE Ee Sas Ee cs 2 wae 5) S 25% 25% 2% ? 13 Sharon Sti Cp 3ge 3 1S 
There was further selling of 3% 21% - ~ rere ——_.— + —_1- pat a aD . = al oo . * ; 62 LACLEDE G of..t 87 : 63% Sharon Steel fst 40 4 hes, 
Brazilian bonds and in the absence} ,5;* ;°4 is Euemes tae | »- 38 Lee Rub&Tire2¥ge 4112 sa i” > & pe Rae 14 im 
of sinking fund purchases prices| 57, 17% am & For Pow 121 3 ae .° 4 
were lower. 2 59 Am &FP S6pf 6k 
Kaffirs continued to sag on low-|'02, 68) Am&FP Sipf 7 
er Cape advices “Gla. Seam Hide & Lth. seer oct 3 295, Lehman Corp1.20a 
Average closing prices follow: “am Home Pr 2 r 3614 Lerner Stores 2¥2 
£ = gt ¥2 65 Am Home Pr 2.40 : 7 : : F 42 Lib-O-F Glass ge 
emt Seok in | Prtons. 1 A seaman il 4 - Range 1944. Stock and Div'd Sis Net 65_ Libby, McN&L toe 
s-An , 89s 6d| Lond Mid ; 0 ' Aon foe f High. Low in Dollars 100s. First. High. Low. Last. Chge 8612 67% Liggett & MyBia 
ne 4 Metal 2 3 - 2! . Vy 24% Cont S$ ; 291g 201g 29m 291 wi 36 , lime Lecom Sige 
9d|Metal B 91s 94!) > ne ; ’ 0%, 24%, Cont Steel Ige 2914 294 2914 29444 ! 7 «Link-Belt 2 4 640 393 
, 1914 12% Cooper-Bess ge 15%q 15% 15% 15%24 2 1934 l ‘euid ¢ arbonicla 2634 26% 2656 é i] 2 2878 Se P Rico S 5.90e 
1334 1034 Copperweld St .80 12%q 12%q 120g 12¥—9— 221% 14% Lockheed Air lYge 79 20% 22% 20% 22 i] Soe oe 
34 44¥2 Corn Exch 2.40. f $2. S2¥2 52 S2V2+ 58 Loew's In 6 65 653% 65 poe Se Ee Jn 
613, 52V_ Corn Prod 2.60 583, 585, S858 — g 4034 Lone StarC lige 2 48g 48g 48 48 Live Sou Nat Gas 7ge 
18434 173% Corn Prod pf 7 .t 1782 17834 178% 17834 ? 8 Long-Bell Lbr.20k 17 113% 12 11% 12 23¥2 Southern Pac 2a. 39 
25'q 15% Cornell-D Ei .60¢. 2044 20% 20% 2014+ 38 «28 Loose-Wil Biscla 3734988 3734 20 Southern Ry Zee 21 
5 Coty Inc .1Se.... 6M Gly 6My  OMet+ 173g Lorillard (P) 34e 19 19% 19 - ee My fs ties 
1% Coty Internat... 33g 3% 3a 4. 3 151 Lorillard (Ppt7t 10 163 163 163 i Sparks We 3 
1834 Crane Co 1 2534 2534 25¥2 25\2— 6934 Louisy & Nash7e 2 8814 88% 881% .. parks With 
20 Cr of Wh 1%.... 3 24% 26% 22 2Mlo— 4 is Sperry Corp te... 11 
1078|. i . { 1634 Crosiey Corp 3ge. 13 25¥— 25% 25%— 2579+ 29% 2534 MacAD& FB 1.SSe 29% 29% 29 ’2 5634 Spicer Mfg pf A 3t »” I ‘ 2 = 
— oa 3134 2614 Am Ship Bidg 3et 31.31% 31 2734 Crown Ck&S 3ge., 1 3634 3634 3634 3634+ 445g 34g Mack Trucks le. 422 42% 42 a Spiegel ae cee nstitutional and conservative 
4s 9d OND . m Smelt > m " : 15¥2 Crown Zellerb 1.. 3 20% 20% 20 2019+ 38% 2634 Macy (RH) 2a.. 14 295— 297% 295% SO 2 Spiegel pf 4%... J 
38s |B Fund yaa ine ‘7 F > 1! ; 97g Crown Zeller pf St 40 102% 102%2 102% 102%). 183, 1434 Magma Copp 39¢ 3 16m 16%p 16% 383, 33%q Square D Co itge 2 | } - mah } 
... 948) Brit &. 60-90. .£113% | “Ae —+ ~ r 28 Crucible Steel 39. 7 35% 36 3534 3534~ ; 1 7 333% 28% Std Brands 1.... 8 private investors whom we 
136s 34/B \ <t 2 2 . 4 , . 3 + : : 67— Manati Sug \gexd 16 82 8%, Bly 3 : 
22s 9d | Brit ‘ £802 75g 22 n St drs Boome Sig 24% 23 oe 20 2 Cuba RR p t 2 26%4 2614 25'4 2512— ; 10% Mandel Bros Ye 1 1334 1334 13% aStdG SEH . ! te . , 
7s 6d|Germa 1924. £13%] 1 m Stor > 17 7 1134 Cuban-Am Sug le. 8 15% 16¥g 15% 16. 1834 Manhattan Shirtla 1 24 24 26 338— Std G&E $6 pr pf 2 / serve know by experience that 
40s dividend . = ao a A 4 > 4 2 2234 Cudahy Pack 30e. 1 24 24 24 2% ae . > — om 40% Std G&E $7 pr pf 6 | : 7 4 
| we 1 1 23 2 is Min Mite at i 6% Marine Midid.lée 12 75g 75g 7ty ee 4 “rt > 63 
1 28%q 28% 28%4 2814+4- 12% Market StRyprpft2S0 17 17 7 | 4% Std Oil Cal 2.... 20 36%% : | j “" in i aad 
S¥g Curtis Publishg... 14 9% 9%, %%q 93% ., ts , “ 31 Std Oil Ind fa... 28 32% 33 32% : when advice or information s 


#. m Super pf 7 1 12705 12714 127% 127%4— » Marsha 2 
FOREIGN EXCHANGE s&s Af. 7Va 12 97 Curtis Pub pf 59.1 20 125%q 126 125% 126. a Martin (GL) t¥e0 = S oy 15% SBY_ 50% Std Ol N J la... 24 S4%m SSM 
16415 156. Am Tel & Te 63 Y aa { 434 Curtiss-Wright349.273 6 6', 6 6ig+ Me 4, - z= ( - | >» 4014 Std Oil Ohio 2... 1 43¥y 43% 43% Dec | | re »fHoilly 
, . . 81 1434 Curtiss-Wr A lVge 12 18% 18% 18Vg 18144 am mH, oe ty ; ios ne ; 5 11034 Std O Ohio pf4tq 1112 112 2 2 requested of us it 18 carefully 
Tuesday, Oct. 31, 1944 . bm 7 f T 719 1 T\2 27 21% Cutler-Ham 1.05¢e. 1 2334 253g 2334 25%4~ tts 19 . atatilecen Alk3ge 19 22 2236 My 2 1 8 62 Std St Sprgs Yee 12 9g ee , : | j 
Official Rates 15234 y ' 6 ] 234 14, d . tig 170 Mathiesn Alk pf7t 10 75 175¥9 175%, fe : 28% Starrett (L S) 2e 1 33% 33% 33 35 | considered, tempered by roac 
* | 13% 8 Foeoe Bite 4 7 iI % if 2 614 DAVEGA ST We 1 Ite BM Tite 11%)+ Me 52% May Dept Strs 3 2 623, 62% 11% Stewart Warn Yaa 14 155_ 157% 
13% Davison Ch Itge. 7 153_ 1534 153— 1534+4- ; = ay “ 4 . . ; 1 ; ? . | | 
SU Deere B Code”. T'0G Oh Oe Hi 2 4 Sp 95s > on Sew ee oe — o experience, and willingly given 
aie aoe, & Se . 3 ~ Be. 1934 McCall Corp 1.60a 283g 281% ae Say VS oe on A : ea 
time Del & Hudson... It 29% 8%, 2 D+ 3234 27 McGraw Elec 1 297% 29% 4 7% Stone & Web 34g 10% s. | ry 
57%_ Del Lack & West 10 Tq 73, % 215 McKess &Robl.40 713, 275 4 13% StudebakerCorp Ve 183g os We consider this an important 
isi agg Edis 5-20 7 2 20% a 1041 7 8 McKe . & Rob pf 104 a 1037 103% 54 Sun Oil fta...... o4 - 
28% Diam Match 1%. 2 32 31% 317%_— - - - - - ~ : — 1 D Mice y : > 
1314 Diam T Motor 1. 2 15% 15% 15% 15to 13% 10 McLellan Strs.85e 13¥q 135% 13% 13% > vs Sumty 68 ate ae part of our service to such in- 
rhe Die A RR Be By 10834 103 McLellanStrs pfSt 40 10834 10834 107% 107% 25 17g Superheater 1a 23¥2 23%2 2 ec 
2734 Dist Corp-S h2.22 . 315, 32 315g 32 + a 8 Mead Corp .45e 195g Superior Sti 1.20. 2034 
: 3 


ne 


~ 
-AwH==—§S AONNRK ERK wy 


(Nee, A 


MERRILL LYNCH, PiERCE, FENNER & BEANE 


Underwriters and Distributors of Investment Securttees e 
Brokers in Securities and Commoditie 


70 PINE STREET NEW YORK 5, NW. & 
Uptown Office: 730 FIFTH AVENUE 


ad + 


— 
Oe CM 


+ ae | —_ 


| 2 8 Lehigh C&N le.. 


lin Laisa alll 103 salt (ae We Od. 


4\q Leh Val RR 





2 
13 * vy 20% Shell Un Oil Ye. 4 231 23% 
6 3 Silver King Coalit 5 3 3% 
“2 } 245% Simmons Co 3ge. 4 
34 oi 23 Simonds S&S 1.60 1 
9% | 405g Sinclair Oi! .80.. 28 
Sits 35 Skelly Oi! 134e.. 6 
4, 29%) Smith(AO)Corpige 7 
791. Ter “yl 23 Smith & Cor Ty2 1 
459 4s, asi. 12 Socony-Vacuum 2 49 
~e “— Sore | ig Sou Am G&P .20e 18 


- 
o 


22 OD Be ULE es es GA bd et SD 
Cn on ieee 


tm 


eS eNrOnwuw 


222 Cuneo Press 1% 





2 Maytag Co 


as 





> 


 . . 
oo 


t 
’ 
a 


NH wWOAOAuUsors ore Bunn 


gu R- 


11%q 1134 11% 113 4 
15¥q Dixie Cup Yee... 1 18% 18%4 18% 18%4— » 31% Melville Shoe 2 a oe oN owe 205% 82 Sweets Co Am ge 17% ‘ vestors, and have devoted much 
Ir Deshier Diet 1¥ge o 3 a a 15¥q BU Menge! Co. tea BB OB "* || 31%_ 27% Swift & Co 1.60a 305— 3 
21% Dome Mines h 6 2 2134 215g 2159-— 7° ° 1} 33M— 2734 Swift Intl 303 \ art 
47" DouglasAircraftie 32 71 72% 71. 712 S2¥q 37 Menge! Stopf 2121 10 50 50) SO SO = A || Site 27he Swift Intt de... 2 a 8s of our facilities and time to 
. 9 g. ieig / s+ 6 27 Mesta Mach 2t% 145_ 345q 3435 43—e+ || 33Nq 2634 Sylvan El Pr ge 12 27% es 
25% Dresser Ind le.. 2 38g 36% 30% Mie+ Bt 6 Miami Copper 7 7 7 7. Cash\| 734 S%eSyming-Gould .... 11 674 
Sie Ounbitt int 2 133g 13%y 13%— 1359+ 14434 116% Midl St Pr re 142%4 14234 14234 142%4— ¥4)| 
137 du Pont de N33ge 4 15534 156 155\%q 155\%q 44 3614 Minn-Honey R Ve 41% a Pn 41% 42¥o+ 3% 8% %7 ‘YTALCOTT (J) 40 2 8 ee 
123% du Pont pf 4¥2.- 2126 126 126 126 + 914 | 614 Minn-Moline 8 1% 8 50 42 Talcott pte pf 2341270 49 49 «4834 ickly ob ble as possibl 
115 Dug Light 1 pf 51170 116 117 116 17 + 137% 12V Minn StP&SSM A 135, 13% 135g 135 we 83, 414 Telautogr .10e xd 3 7% 7% 7% 7 qUuICKIy O CainaDie aS pOssidie 

+ Minn StP&SSM B 13g 1% 134 1% . 1234 10% Tenn Corp 34e.... 1 108% 105_ 108% 
734 Mission Corp le 18% 18% 1834 18%4— % S0\q 445 Texas Co 2a 465, 47V— 4655 
4 Mo-Kan-Texas 2% 2% % Met VW! 65, 442 Texas Guif P Yee. 6 Sim 57m SMe 
Mo-Kan-Tex pf 12 12 11% 11% .. || 37% 3296 Texas Gulf Su 2a 5 34% 35% 3% 
Mohawk Carpet ‘2 1534 35% 3594 35%4~ tq) 192 I4Mq Tex Pac C&O Yaa 10 18 18% 18 
: : ~ Monsanto pfA4Vet 10 116V> 116% 116% 116%e— | 15% 8% Tex PL T .1Sg...173 15 1534 14% 
1334 13% 1334 13% .. : te 2 cite S) . SiPe a. 117|| 273 17¥e Tex & Pac Ry le 4 21%— 2134 218 
4434 45 44% 45 53 5_ Montg Ward 2.. 15 5! Si’, Si Si7g+ 1%) <'°8 7\2 y wont > 


: 24\q 12%q Thatcher Mfg Wye S 18%, 18% 1812 " 
12% 13 12% 13 4 21Nq Morris & Essex.11840 28% 29%4 28%q 28tq—~ Ye! “Oo¢ ‘8 pate %, 95, «(95 P | Ry 
5 iy Mot Py Ve 21% 211 1 vy 8 aime rair 4 8 8 
53_ 55_  55e+ 7 2 Motor Prods te. 1 21%, 219 21%9 21¥e+ %%i) oo) 7° Thermoid Co .4. 85, 8348S is e e resspric oO. 


os oo 


fmt 


i making it as valuable and as 


>> >>> PrP Pr b> > b> > 


ables 
SWITZERLAND- 
ww Value I 
Cabies 
Far East 


‘ r ¢ 
d ari 


13 13 13 13 + 
634 3634 3654 3654 
16 16 16 16 + 
16734 169 16734 169 4 
487%_ 48%_— 4834 4834 


105, EAGLE PL 60.. 
39 t 33.0 Eastern Air L 
7234 67% East S St! 2060 
gz ? 157 Eastman Kodak 5 
latin America > ner Yea 2 —_- sf aH - 41 Eaton Mig 3 
ent — —_ se " : a Oe -y 4 g 1334 Elastic StopN 34ge 
ah pg cant a é . . «4 . =" Hine on - 17¥q El Auto-Lite 1'ge 
' } 4 ; 10 Elec Boat Ite 
‘ yr ~ = Sip , 5, El\&Mus Ind .0Be 
10e.103 8 5 4344 , iS, El Power & Lt 
LOCO ct3ge 17 2 ; 225_ 2275+ 78 El Pow&Lt $6 pf 
Or 4 1 84 81% El Pow&Lt $7 pf 
1453+ 3914 El Storage Bat 2 
1174+ 1434 EmersonEIMf .5Se 
671/2+- 2 1644 834 Eng Pub Service 
24394+- 9234 Eng P S $6 pf 6f 3 
5114+ 1'4 4g Equit Off Bidg 
1614+ 133g 9% Erie RR L..... 
16¥%g+ 13% 93, Erie RR Bi... 
32 + 645g 465, Erie R R pf AS 
77 — 13% 65g Eureka V Cleant2 
10 + 153g 9% Evans Prod 3ge.. 
135g+ 4434 213, Ex-Cell-O 2.60 .. 137% 105% Nat Auto F pf.60 
45 + 434 2% Exchg Buf .35e.. , 14% %5— Nat Aviat ‘ge 
+ 42V 3314 FAIRBANKS Mia 20% 20% Nat Biscuit 1.20 
1835+ 2 4 , 180%) 165 Nat Biscuit pf 7, 
63%+- 262 21% Fajardo Sugar 2 25\% 2 - 17 Bq Nat Can 
12s 143g 934 Faens Tel & Rad 127% : 33% 26 Nat Cash Reg la 


47 73 5 : 
4712 1734 145g FedLt&Traction 1 1688 2 mes Cuntalenr 20 
“a . 143% 11% Nat Cylind G .80 


103,— 24 1942 Fed M & § I'oe0. 
18344 103g 5 Fed Mot Trk 40 Rs, : ‘ 2535 > Nat Dairy Pr 1.20 
292 2 20 «13% Nat D Strs Ya 


LONDON, Oct. 31 (Reuter) S 1280 Boeing Airpl 2 165a+ > 30 225g Fed D Strs 1% 
Ris nderer : agli: f\ 55 ioe ie 5 } 5334 §33 1032 93 Fed D St pf 4¥qt 40 1031 10305 1031 1031 |. 
a John Anders on Chan . llor of te _ 2 : 4 534 1% 17 Ferro ton se. 2334 233 2334 2334+ 177% 30Vq Nat Siatitore 2. 
the Exchequer, said today in the 1.206 3314-4. 52% 45 Fid P F Ins 1.60a 52 52% 52V2 527+ 1455 9 Nat Gypsum Vag. 
House of Commons that sterling) 417, 3414 Borg-Warner 1.60 834 5134 3824 Firestne T&R 1¥g 3 SI¥y Si¥2 SIvo S1¥2+ som, 19 Net Lend Ye 
balances held by overseas coun- 7 | Bower Roll B2Vge 1 42 Vg 42Vg—" Vy 109 103%g Firest T&R pf 4v2 1 10734 107%4 1073 107344 34 179V2 164 Nat Ld pf A 7..t 
s held ' sez in Me 12kt Braniff Aire é : 19144 44 35% First Nat St 219. 4342 431% 43% 1S2¥2 141 Nat Lead pf B 6f 
tries, though they represented a) ¢, 40% Bre ies Cp Adlge g 7 5} a 261% 183g Flintkote .45e.... 22Vq 2234 226 22 ac 23 Nat M&St C .45e 
liability of Britain’s national econ- 8% Bridgeport Br 1 ii! 3834 34/2 Florence Stove 2 3834 3834 3834 3 7M%q Pw & Lt . 34— 
Senet deena dienes obligations of| 4% 27 Briggs Mig 2... 3814+ $834 43% Follansbee St ptt 1 4434 4434 4434 70, STigNatl Steel 3 5. 3 -— & a 34 106 Soi Unit’ Drop of ais 7 ot 18 te ie. 
ke ‘ hig erates : ae 143g Bklyn Un Gas 1/e 21%+ 15% 11% Food Fair Strs 1. 15¥q 15%q 15% 1734 4 Nat Supply .... J 37g 15" 8 8 5 5 5 
the Britisn Treasury, nor: do bal- 174 Bruns- Balke zB, 2019+ 662 53% Food Mach 1.40¢e. 60 0s 60 60 891g 794 Nat SS5V¥2%pfSvet 3 B62 862 86¥2— 1%4)) Hb p> pwr soonest. S oe ot P 5 ‘ 
ances themselves form part of the) 131%, aN Bu wes-Erie Ale. 12%5— 245g 16 Foster Wheel 1/e. 22% 23 2234 302 25 Nat S $2 pf 2¥ak § 25%q 25Yg 25g .. || 1136 3" Usk €) Coal tse 9 1034 100s 103% WE TAKE PLEASURE IN ANNOUNCING THAT 
7 > « 5 | f 
national debt in the technical sense) 12% 3 Budd Mfg eer ae = 136 Free Sines elt as” as” 0” fn yy ee, re vt 48)! 33% 26¥)2 Unit Eng&Fdy 2 4 32% 3272 32% . 
we Budd Mfc 5t ~ ‘ ° 2 atomas 2e.. 8 B + 1/ 1 it 31 Y 3 ( 
of the term 7 oS oe mee eee 2014. 363g 3012 Freeport Sui 2 32Y2 325, 322 32 ‘ 31 22 Neisner Bros 1a. uM ua 4 "al tf ie a oh re ne by MR. HOWARD A. PLUMMER 
39 39%q 39 as 1052 962 Neisner Br pf434t 1051/4 105% 105% 105% ++ || 41% 282 Unit Mer&Mfr 2a 16 402 40 4033+ 
1141/4 114% 11444 1144%q 110 107% Newberry S%pfSt 30 108 108 108 108 .. |\196 9834 Unit. Mr&MfepfSt 106 106 106 +1 HAS TODAY BECOME A LIMITED PARTNER 





OTR cent 


rPrPr> > b> > 


~OoeNUN eo 


: 7 6 
Mot 2 21% 21% 21% 21 ee 

otor Wheel 1.20 1m 21% 21%— 21% 6% 4% Third Ave Tran 1 5% 5% 57 
Mullins M B We ; 


93 93 93 | ; 
7 * esis rs 5¥g 2 Thompson-Starrett 4¥e 4¥— 4% . 68 William Street 01 Devonshire Screet 


1 
2 H% 2 Ji%™ 2 
1 ee 
Mullins M pf —e as W7Vq— 1 17 13 Tide Wat A O le 10 15% 15%q 15% 
1 
7 
1 


Muell 4 
2 Musiter Gr 3.60 49 32% Thompson Pro 34ge 46% 465, 461 





Munsingwear Ye. 1 22 22 + 74) 3334 25 Timken-D A 1%9¢ 3 32\q 32Mq 3214 32% .. * NEW YORK 5 BOSTON 


$7 Murray Corp Nge 7 1234 1284 12¥y 123% <. || S242 4342 Timken R Bridge 14 S0% SI S03 
432 Myers(FE)&B2V2¢ 51% Si¥g— 1% wre THe Trane 8. West hie : ne ae oe >. Members New York Stock Exchange 
' 1 3g Tri-Cont Corp .. 17 4¥2 4% 4Y ee aa el 
15\4 1Sa+ P| oe” as Tacon of 6.480 97 OIE ote oe | GOVERNMENT MUNICIPAL RAILROAD, 
. vey ‘ J72 4|| 20vg 155g Tubize Rayon 1.. 8 18% 18% 18 ' , : 
187% 19 + %4 2650 21%p Twent C-Fox 2a... 15 25% 25¥9 25% PUBLIC UTILITY. INDUSTRIAL BONDS 
e 10 ++ || 33¥p 2834 Tw C-FoxF pill 4 32% 32 32 AND INVESTMENT STOCKS 
il 11%q+ %4)| 10612100 TwC-Fox prpf4¥2 11 Np 1051 105% 10504 '% | 
1334 1334+ 3s) 9 5% Twin C Rapid tt > e 8 7% T%~ | 
24 2334 24 . 1081 6814 TwinCRT pfSiqkt 20105 105 105 105 —1 | 
‘tite 1 aaet 2 143, 85g Twin Coach .30g. 4 123— 12¥2 123% 12%2+ 
8 —- % 
3234 32% 33 - 66 51'%4 UNDRWD-E 1¥ 160 6 6 6 + 
115, 115— 11344 “4 14 914 Union Ba&P 4 8 133g 13% 13% 1342+ 
13% 2 13% 13% .. 8234 76 Union Carbide 310 80 80 7934 797—3— 
233g 23 23% 23%g+- 5g) 203, 17% Union Oil Cal 1 2 185% 185— 185g 185—g— 
181% 1814 185g+ 114) 11134 93% Union Pacific 6.. 14 109% 110 109%4110 + 
353g 352 3402 3434 34/102 922 Union Pacific pf4 3100 10042100 10014+ 
127% 1234 13 + 1%) 34¥2 225, Unit Air Lines¥ge 12 3134 32% 3134 31344 
24 24 = 243g+ 14), 32¥q 255g Unit Aircrafti¥ge 16 303g 307% 30% 30%4— 
177% 2 1771 177124 2 || 110% 10034 Unit Airc pf 5.. 1108 108 108 108 ‘ 
1495, 1495, .. |, 70¥2 61 United Carbon 3.. 1 65 65 65 
21 2034 21 .. || 1% 1% United Corp .... 48 «1% Rs, MWe y 
634 6% 634 383g 315, Unit Cp pf iigk 32 373g 3734 3736 3735+ 


Nw ewwe 


ue 


é 


~s OOm hy 


11% NASH-KELV ge 
37% 28 «Nash C & Stl 2et 
193g 137% Nat Acme 2 ... 
13% 9 Nat Auto Fib tg 


4 
25 
1 
1 
2 
9 

) 


~ 


es 
’ 


30.25 


LIMITS BRITISH DEBT i 


Anderson Explains Treasury's ,%* 


Stand on Overseas Sterling St 
"8 
193, 


As t Ie 
SSeH ats nSs Seow 
a -_ — 
tw i) 
Srocee 


SVN SK UR Re ROR RU See Dat 
— ae 


SONN@NUwUe 


~~ 








wee 
wSnroo 





to Oo Sw 


WrNNAWON 
_ 


A large portion of these bal-| 201 165% Bullard Co Ve 19% .. 422 291 Freuhauf Tr 1.20e 


ances, the Chancellor said, had| 37, 2755 Burl Mills 2.10e : 357a+ 116 103 Freuhauf T pf4¥at OTN N Stoo 08 108 108 108 yl 
‘ yree 53 2g Burr Add M_ .60 y , > es 2 ewmont e 8 a ‘ ‘ d 3, iV, 3 ‘ | 
been invested in short-term Gov-| [5% ; ? hTB pf3Vakt340 5834+ 5S¥q 27%, GAIR (R) .309 42 42 4% 412+ 1614 Newportindus 600 7 17"q , Tat dail sar itu +O Ver es > io pea or OF THIS FIRM 

saan ’ / é sush T B p : ; ee > : 2 US&For S pf 6f 20 10534 10534 10534 105% 
ernment securities, which were! 1; 87% Butler Bros .60 3 12 11% 472 252 Gamewell Co 3..? 44%, 447% 44% 447,— 13 NewptNews Ship ? 163g 16% 16% .. | 1494 U S Freight t%e 16 16 16 
part of the national debt, but “a| 3% 2% Butte Cop&Z ‘4g 3 3% Ve. sat fy Gar Wd In xd 3 6 he 6 Sey i5Vp NY Air Brake 2 4575 (Shi MN 70 US Gypsum 2... 2 7614 76% 76 
greater part represented ‘sterling| $3 $192 Byers(AW) of 7-1 30 BBY Bia Bla Bat Na) TRA tole Gaerd Cont tas. 4 te ee Taek AE. ae)| Zise H5d NYContralRR Use oP is SEV atire es e YC. REN & NOLS 

ah : é 20 ~Byron Jack Ile 2 2 2 212 . . : P 8 chi & ot Louls 2 4/14 «14 4 3444 US Ind Chem la : 3 k : y FOUNDED 1909 
given in payment for local curren : 5434 4134 Gen Am Tr 17e, 52. 5134S 734 62 NY Chi& Stl pf 88 88 + 4%) 5 U S Leather... % 7% 7% 7% .. | 
cies required for military expendi Sq 245 CALIF PACK 112 : aVa+ 93% 734Gen Bak .60.. 855 BYe 5 302 N Y Dock pf.... 40 40 +1 |  16V_ US Leather Alte 282 2834 28Y2 2 MEMBERS NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE 
. . tg Callahan Z-Lead 1¥g+ 113, 634 Gen Bronze .306¢ 10% 10%, 7 75 NY Lack & W ct.4 7 16Vo 7 76V>—813, \| - 1 | : 

ture in various countries.” 7 alumet&Hec .60¢ - c, 75, 43g Gen Cable 534 534 «5 14% NY Shipbuildg se 4 , 196 19 *} 1 eit US Piped Fd 1.60 PPaINE Pe a 

These balances he added, “‘are| 21% 15¥4 CampbellWyan 34e 2 1% IM 44 18%a 115g Gen Cable A... fh 16¥2 16¥2 D oe 3334 Noblitt-Sparks 2a 192 392 » 392 .. | i ‘Us Rent & _ 2% 2 2 : S52 WALL STREET. NEW YORK 5. N. Y. 
ot blocked, since they are avail-| 31¥2 23¥4 Can Dry G A Jae 2848 28%— 2849— 105%— 8124 Gen Cable pf 7kt 60 102¥2 10242 102¥2 102¥2 3 1832 Norf&Western 10t 80 210Y2 211% 21042 211%2+ 1 | Rubber Iie 8 48 48% 48 4B%—+ 
not sin they are avail . 4 : 9 > 4 40 «#4U S Rub iV % _ 

: , 125 Canad Pacif le xd 0% 10% 10 10 — 153 140 Gen Cigar pf 7..1 10 1472 147¥2 14712 14712. 22 1161 Norf&Westn pf 4t 120 a. te a 130 US Rub 1 pf 6e 1 149V/2 1491 149% 149494 i 
able to make payment anywhere in) ; 67% Capital Adm A... 94 Gq 9% . 392 35 Gen Elec 1.40... 3834 3873 385, 385 75, No Am Aviat 14e 3 11%, 11% 11394 1 51% US Sm R&M13%ge 4 53 53 S38 SBCs 
the sterling area 142 * iy Caro C&O 5 ” L 186% ive 114Y2+ “— re Gen Foods 1.60... 41 A bee 41 ee 1534 Nor Amer Co 1.24f 185g 183g— } 69  USSm R&M pf3lg 1 7334 7334 7334 733%4— % BRANCH OFFICES 

Z7ye Carpenter SU 12ae st ia 18% 18% isto Yel| 66° Side Gen Movers 24 at at an att’ %| i oe eee $54 5534... |) 63% SVL S Steel 4..... 27 S7%y S84 5734 SBlet+ Val | 
183g Carrier Corp -il 44 183g 1833— +4 ig Gen Motors 2%ge. 5: 8 612 61% 6114+ 515g NoAmC0534 % pf27 54 S4 5334— 1 5 5 $22 FIFTH AVE.,N. Y. MONTCLAIR, N. J. 
ADEQUATE PROFITS ASKED } 57 ' Carrier Cp pf 2% 1 57 57 57 57 be 13012 12534 Gen Motors pf 5 12734 12734 12734 12734— 13, NorthernPacific le 1 16 16 . 34\| 1st —_ . —— x : es ite 4 es 
é } 33 «Case (J 1) Co 3¢e 3534 3534 3534 3534— ae rs = ~~ a ye. i — 115g 115, . 172 NorthwestAirl Ve 27 26%... || 482 4412 US Tobacco pf..t 50 4734 4734 4734 4734+ 
$1 1432 Case (J I) pf 74110147 148 147 148 + 2 65g Gen Prt Ink .30e.. v2 We We We .. 37%@ Northwest Tel 3.t ; 4634 2 4634+ Va); 41 3 1 4Vq 43, 4% «43 
Conley Says Post-War Jobs Are : 4414 Caterpil Tractor 2 9 475g 47% 472 47% .. 42% 1¥q Gen Pub Service 1%, 1% 1% 1% .. i] ne ia Uehed stoves A 434 44 434 434 ci 
| 40 315— Celanese Cp 3/70f 3 34 34-3334 «34 ’ 28/2 19% Gen Ry Sig 34e.. 252 26 p . 2 153g OHIO OIL Vea... 165, 16% .. |} 4 my ‘ 5 5, 
Dependent on Such Returns 27° 113 Celanese 7% pf Tt 20127 127 127127 + 4% 33g Gen Real & Ut n. 3%, 3% 75-4- $5 2454 Oliver Corp. 45 25 2494 25 —" Yell 44 wn th ne ie is 4 ts sy 
» 11 Celotex Corp ¥2.. 10 13Y_ 13% 13 13 — 25% 1939 Gen Refract .We. 22q 224 22 Vo 1064, Oliver Corp pf 1270 1075, 4 1075_4- Sq) 
Special to Tur New Yor Time 17 Celotex Cp pf 1.1230 1814 183% 18% 181/,— 19V2 145, Gen Shoe 1.. 19¥2 191 ; be. 85, Omnibus Corp 34e 10%, 10 10 13% 94 VAN NORMAN 1 125g 125, 12% 12% .. 

ATLANTIC CITY Oct 31 >? 1914 Cent Aguirre 11 3 205— 2034 205—, 2034 953, 7412 Gen St! C 6k xd.t43 89, 91 . 5¥y 99 OmnibusCorp pf 8 103 103 + 52 28 Van Raalte 2Vge, m2 284 28 2814+ 
Cl Miia 15 Bio Cent R RN J 10% 10V2 10¥2 102+ 2634 2234 Gen Tel 1.60 255, 2534 f ; 844 Oppenheim Col le 1 12g 12Yq 12¥_ 12V—e+- Vi! 23Y_ 1734 Vanadium Cp Yee 1854 18% 185% 

yde G. Conley of Mount Vernon, 28 2034 Cent Viol Sugl¥e 7 27% 28 27% 2534 1934Gen T & Rub Ve 24, 24% y 242 18 Otis Elevator le 2 25% 22%5— 14 12V%q Vert Cam Sug.40e 14g 14 
N. Y., president of the American)! 11% 74 CenturyRibM 0e, 3 11 113% 11 . 13¥2 Tip Siliette sof R 0 23 12% , 554 Owens-Ill Glass 2 § 58 2 38 wii 8014 63% Vicks Sh&Pac 5.t 738 «O78 
Institute c Stee Con . 71 0 Cerro de Pas 3 1 32 32 32 2 - 2038 eGimbel Bros .90¢ 195% 5 ; 25Vo 21%— Vic Ch Wks Ie. 23 13 k 
told — ' wt ee matruction,| “4% “Gs? Certain-teed Prod. 246 7% 7% 7%» 73 102 83 Gimbel Br $6pf6 1 100 ares, 10% PAC AM FISH 1g 143% 1414 14%4— Si, 3% Va-Caro Chem. 3%_ 3% 3 
a had eaders of the structural 126 57 Cert-teed pf 1290 12012125 1202 123 52 45 Glidden cv pf 2% 51 51 51 51 } 82 Pac Coast oot il 107,— 6234 50 Va-C Ch 6%pf3k 4 COtiCSA 1 
steel fabrication industry at the in-| 1314 11 Ches Corp Va 80 2 130 13Y) 13% 132+ Ye 139 85% Gold&Stk Tel 6f 90 131% 139 13114139 4 2334 17% Pac Coast 2 pf..t 1 21% 21% 21. |/420 113% Va EIRP $5pfS.1 90 118 118 : aS WEINBE RG & CO 
50 50 495g 495—— 30, Pac Gas & Elec Vg 333%q 332 33% .. 36% 33 © Virgin’n Ry pfl¥2 3634 3634 : oo | ° ° 
104 104 104 104 +- HW 25V2 Pac Mills 2 . 40 1934— | MEMBERS NEW YORK SECURITY OFALERS ASSEN 


48 44 Ches & Ohio 3... 23 46% 47g 4634 47% 543g 40 Goodrich(BF) 11e 
ORI aie ; 534 C 7 J 614 6% 6% 4 104 98 Goodrich (BF) pf5 . 1 
conference here today that post-| sss" y37) chi & E Ill J 3 138— 14 © 138% 50  363— Goodyear T&R 212 465, 47 465— 47 4 21Vp 11713 Pac Tel&Tel 4izet 80 121% 1214 120%4 12034 ., "|| S02 40 WAB RR pf 4Ng0 Sie Si * 
war employment will depend on| 77% 4%C rt West S¥2 Sa 5% 5 112% 10414 Goodyr T&R pt 5 ss ee a ae 6%) 35_ PackardMotor .10¢ ‘ 533 CS . er 3014 26% Walgreen Co 1.60 297% 29% 2 : 60 WALL STREET, NEW YORK 5. N. Y. 
‘ 22% 228%, 222 225 17%q 812 Goth Hosiery aq 155g 155— 155_ 1559+ 287% PanAm Airways 1g 3 32 31534 48 Walk(H)G&W hd s » x ay 
( 53, ( ‘ ~ ia 4 7 11% Graham-Paige M 57, «6 5% «=m 4534 Panhand EPL 2e ge 493% 493g— 714 Walworth Co .300 812 85g TELEPHONE WHITEHALL 3-7830 
trial properties of adequate re-| 59, > & NV 70 27 27% 21va+ 51 334 Granby C Min.30¢ MV. 4% 43_ 435 4 109% Panh EPL pf 5.001130 110 13g Ward Baking 8 18_ 158 
turns on their investment a Nien Wt 49 , 4815 2 16 95, Gran C Stl .175¢ 13g 13%q 13%, 13¥g+ % 2 Panhand P&R 10e 6 ve § 11% Warner Bros Pict 12%8 ‘ 
“Without plant investments) 213s | Peon foul > 19% 17 1412 Gt N Ir Ore ct2c- 2 17 17 16% 16% 257) 2350 Param Pictures 2. 28 2 Sp ne ee at ak ee ere ae ee ee 
; . Ze ; , 3 155, 1! 155, ins 411% 25% Gt North Ry pf2e 22 40% 41 4014 4 27 Park & Tilford.. 22V2 Wesson O&S 1'e 25"q 2"2 
made in the past,” Mr. Conley said,) “¢3¢ “138 Childs C 434 434 455 2914 243, Gt West Sugl.8e 2 29 29 29 ie auton oe o> 
“our present mass. production) 3 s e Cop 2e....t 50 2 2634 2’ 54/2 431 (H_L) 2a.. 4 53¥g 53% 53¥g 53%—4 OF ee 
sii he tmemoesinle 3 Aeneas IE — FO sng Sap y 8934 89° es ae tote Gravtound co i 19 224 223% 224 2 4|; 838 483 Parmelee Transport 
yuld be impossible. nvestments ~pgt ig plies pPock age PO 7 OFT 265—¢ 11. Grum Airc E1¥e.129 25 265, 24% 3 || 2 155g Patino Mines 2Vge 
in these plants must provide a re-| ° Vg 37% Clev cone ee ; 3 43 “ees % 3 vantan Su - 13 5% Si SY : 9334 Penney (J C) 3a.. 
454 371 Clev Graph Br 2 62 25g Guant 9 . oo 131% Penn-Cent Air! 
turn on additional sums for later! 199 “le vGrap! Br pf St 20 4 10614 4 16%q 64 Guif Mob & Ohio 22 1134 12¥g 1134 +f 4 ined Paik 
expansion will not be available 81/2 30% Climax Molyb1.20a 3 ; sag 3 ’ 59 33 Guif M&O pf2vge 2 S52 S5V2 553% 5S 555 Pen Sar 
ae 291 ett PeabodyiVoe 3 7 7 Ng 171/2-+4- 49% 4214 Guif Oil Ila 6 46%q 4612 46% ioe Penn Gl Sand.... 
Individuals who hold industrial) ,25°2 3¢? vet Deab of tay * 146 , se 13g 25% Penn RR te 
stocks are the owners of the tools! 461, ca-Cola 3. y 6 + 33. 27 “HACK WAT 1%. 10 33 33 33 , tot for Man A 
of production and, as such, are en-! 672 59% Cc la AS 38 «=. 27/2 Hack W pf A 1341160 282 28Y2 2% 2 n S45 Pere Mere ; f 
titled to an adequate rental for the! °'2 - olg-Palm 2a 3 4 3 3 16%4 11%q Hamil Watch .30e 5S 14g 14¥2 14¥— ‘ "73a Pfeiff “Br f': 
an adequate rental for the! 3,% - Collins & Aik 34 53g 35: 3! 1061) 102 Hanna(MA) pf4¥qt 30 10534 106 10534 106 + a? te aes oe 
use of the tools sg 1434 C 1g 17 1) 21 15¥pHarb-Walker 1.. 3 18 18 18 18 — 2¥2 40V2 Pfizer, C&Col.40a 
Sade ; : 95g 62 Hayes Indust 34¢ 1 9 9 os a8 Sena — ; 
: : g 12% P bh - ° : o "1 7" 7 } hila Co6°% pf 3. 
Certain-teed Meeting Put Off 3 Col&South 2 pf.t 40 17% 17% 17% 17%- 812 2% Hayes Mfg 13% ee Tat 21% 19 Phila Elec 900 
: ‘ banger , 331g 26% Col Brest 206 We 32% 32%; 3g 99 Hazel-Atlas Gi St 60 1083, 1083g 108 108 ME 
BALTIMORE, Oct. 31 \Pi—A\ ‘53 Colum G&EI 2 22 20%q Hecht Co 1.26 20%, 20% 207% 207% pe pny ES 
special meeting of the Certain- c 8 %e P 5 2 gp gee A. - : a ae 82" Philip Morris 
ed Product: tion’s stock 244 1614 Colum “ore 2 2 ~ 7 Hercul Pow 2° 
le + P? oe ts C orporation’s stock- , 715 ( to... 8 : 128 Hercul Powd pf6t 4 
holders, called to consider amend-| « » 4 ri 1 Inv 2 15 45 : 3 63 Hershey Choc 3.. 
ment of the company’s articles of 141 =) ! oa3 47% rare ae aus 
cae : on a : cicada a ae t { 6 2834 =. 314 Holly Sugar oe 
incorporation and approve an in ; 5_ Comwith & South 56 Sie 7% 39 Homestake Min.. 
1 


> 


—A-cenewSn 


— 


8 8 
7 37 37 


— 
2K we Ome Nene 


> 
=> 





=aS 








—nwSnSonueene 
- x 
CUNwN CHK NN 


Sau 
wean 


stitute's twenty-second annual 


assuring “stockholders of indus- 


r) 
Ww OO Ne ee ee 


—— 
ee 


=] 
wn 


1814 West Ind Sug Yaa 12 25 25 2434 | p Y SERVICE IN UNLISTED 
83 W Penn El a 71120 1%, ha B38 3| TO RENDER A COMPLETE E 

962 WPennE! 7°%opf7.t 2 2 ‘4 

3 2s West Auto Sup 1 3 33 33 32% SECURITIES FOR BANKS, BROKERS AND OEALERS. 
334 West Maryland 3.4 4 .%& : e 

41 W Un Tel A 1¥9e 19 43 43%_ 425% oe SAMUEL WEINSERS 
222 West Un Tel B 1 25% 252 25% “- aetna 

21 «West Air Br 1%ge 11 283, 283g 28 A Y PHILIP WEI ERG 
91 West EIAMfg 4. § 104% 105 10434 

20g Wheel Steel 34¢. 10 29g 29% 29% ' November Ist, 1944 

6614 Wheel St! pr pfSt 40 79% 7934 79 

18 White(SS)Dent1.20 1 2014 20% 20% 

20 White Motor 34¢ 6 24% 2434 2412 $) —__ inne ‘ 

5 White Sew Mach. 3 83g 8% 83g 2 8 ‘ a , 

641% Wh Sew M pf 2kt 10 83 83 83 V2 | ie Established 1812 

45g Wilcox O11&G .20e 2 7% 7% 7% 


6 Willys-Overland.. 28 1434 1434 1412 4 . . 
8 Wilson & Co.... %W% 934 ott , 
3 ooo 8014 Wilson&Co $6pf6. 3 9634 9634 2 . b 
Bl B1Y4 B1%q 81% . 82 Philip Morris 3a 22 92% » 92 3634, Woolw’th(FW)1.60 420 4234 420g 42! ) Z, Le IN N 
131 131 131 131 I: 108 Phil Mor 4Vapf4t/2 : 111% rise 205g Worthinaton P&M 35 35% 35% 3 2 | gho te coe 
6934 6934 6934 6934— 1¥%2 Paltios y- Meade ‘v0 49 WorP&M cvprpf42 3 77 78 ad 7 QT TE HH} 4 
re ee ener + - é  pf4¥/ nae : . A \ k 
44«44«—CO4K 4G ix ry une 4734 WorP&M pr pf4t2 3% Lergest Title Plants in the State \ { An 


175, 175 173g 1733— 23% Pills Mills 1'ge. ph. | : 331% 331 33 
: @ --4,|| 3642 2M VALEGTOWNE © § Se 32 3 LL yIINEW JERSEY REALTY 810 BROAD STREET 


424 4214 4214 421% 5 Pittsburgh Coal.. 
7134 914 York Corp .30e.. 135, 1334 


163g 163g 163g 163g .. s 61 Pitts Coal pf 3k. ‘ 
92 as a 143g Youny Spg&W la 185g 185g 185% f 4 TITLE INSURANCE Co. Newurk 


110 110 109 109 — TV Pitt Coke&Chm¥/gq 
a + 2 . /2\| 4 335g Youngst ap S ae Bs 13a Pe Bes ime 

‘s oes |106 9% YngstSh&T pf V2 4 4 4 4 ‘ ° eder voeroe Sy ete 
482 4734 g 13 Yngst Stl Dr 3g¢ 6 17 173% 17 173+ NEWARK e TRENTON 


1% 17%9 Mall aay 33% ZENITH RAD Je 2 41 41 41 ht hl ————— = 

16% 165 . f 4 Zonite Prod .15e. 4 8 4 8 oe tia i 

ie iat int inn Cr Sd eS | msenes | = oun | 
eace Frotits Period Ended © 


—w 
ee ee ee a ie 


~— ew 
WwAne oO 


Y 


WwreUNnNNOSOKOWWONwre ae oS 


crease in the authorized common " 79 Com&Sou pf 334k 183g 1334 Houd-Hersh B 34e 
stock from 1,000,000 to 2,000,000 814 Conde Naste le xd 20 + 114 103 Househld Fin pf5t 
s r ' . 28 21% Congol-Nairn 1... 24V2 .. 13% 74 Houston Oil ... 

> ay 8 4 4 
mime was adjourned today to 434 | 3¥> Cons Coppermin : _— 377% 30% Howe Sound 11e 321g 325, 32%, 3259+ 634 Pitt Steel. 
Nov. 21. Rawson G. Lizars, chair-! 253, 211% Cons Edison 1.60. 40 2 25, . 23, 13g Hudson & Man. 15g 15— 158 153— % Pitt Set Ster..t 
man, said holders of 61 per cent! 1085g 1023_ Cons Edis pf 5... 3 107% 107%e+ Yo|) 28%, 22% Hud Bay M&S h2 4 2735 27%, 2738 Zitat «tte Pi eae 
. . ve ‘ 6! 234 Consol Film Ind.. 30 6 6 1 1 Mot 40 8 14 1 r] : 4 $ . 
of the company’s common stock) 977% 1658 Cor Fim pf 3gk 11 273% 27 2\4— i" me tr. 8m aes 8 165% Plymouth Oil ta.. 
had indicated approval of the! 131, 7%, Cons Laund .85e. 5 115+ 191% Pond Crk Poc 1'e 
amendment, but that 662/3 per! 3234 24 Cons Nat Gas la, 30 2834 29% 287+ 19/2 1012 ILLINOIS CENT . 17 1534 1644 1534 16 + 85g Poor & Co B tae 
cent was necessary 19¥ 12 Consol RRCuba pf 23 18: 8 1814— 672 46 Ill Central 114.1 70 6442 6472 64% 6412+ 11% Pressed Sti Car 1 
n S necessary. 177 11% Cons Vultee 2 115 174+ 44 25Vq Ill Central pf ... 4 38% 391 38% 39724 5034 3512 Press Sti Cr2pf21/2 
. 253, 18VCon Vultee pfilg 4 2479+ 20V%4 1534 Indpls P& L120 2 18% 19 18% 19 59 523g Proctor & Gam 2a 
Appeal by Railroad Dismissed 175s 143g Consol’n Coal 1553+ 4234 353g Indust Rayon 2 365g 37 3653 «37 + 121 116 Proctor&Gampf St 10 119 119 119 119  .. || Bankruptcy Act, or securities assumed by such cOmpanies. tUnit uke aint - > Ye 
1101 102% ConsumPow pf4l 10834— 105 100 Indust Ray pf 4 1 104% 1041 1041/2 1047/24 183g 131% Pub Svc NJ 3ge.. 16 1678 17% 1634 17 + || of trading, ten shares; sales in full. Rates of dividends in the In bound booklet illustrated with charts unds. No fluxuation in ro ncipGs. Tour 


2 
3 4 
aera cs Fae gg fo¥ 2 1 : in in principe 
CHIC AGO, On t. 31 (PB An ap- 2918 20 Contain Corp 119e 4 > 281/24 1081/2 887% Inger-Rand 6 2 10814 1081/4 108% 10814 1202 1131/2 Pub Sve NJ8% pf8 20 1202 120V2 1202 12012 . foregoing table are annual disbursements based on last quarterty Send $1 NOW for Report T-34 —— nsured up to > $s y he Fed- 
peal filed by the debtor Chicago,} 10 734 Cont Bak 1e ge. 773+ 87 7114 Inland Steel 4V2e 1 8312 8312 832 8312+ 112% 10414 Pub S NJ7°epf7.t 40 1123 11234 11233 112344 3%] or semi-annual declaration. Unless otherwise noted, special or }} erat savings and Loan Insurance Cor 
6 4 PENN FEDERAL SAVINGS & LOAN ASSOC. 
, 
4 
0 
1 


> 


“> 
NAawonnnreK Ore & w 


105g 105g 10% 10% .. 6834 Pitt Coke&Chpf5t 


3 
5 
2 
5 


Member bederal Deposit Insurance ( orp 





1034 1034 ‘4\| 5g Kimberly C.Nov 1 s % Ne  % Cash 


153g 1534 153g 17¥2 Van Raal..Nov.14 18 18 18 + % 
50 SOYs 50 SOVa+ 1%) — a =|] Plus UNITED'S new Postwar Forecast} ERWVESTMENT 2 2°. 1944 
S787 157 57 — Yall “In bankruptcy or receivership_or being regrsanized under |] wnat TO EXPECT WHEN GERMAN WARENDS'”| For individuals and firms. Lego! for Trust 


Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific Rail-| 43% 32% Cont Can 34e 391/> 39% 3 3No+ 1 1234 934 Inspirat C Cp 34e 105, 1034 105, 105, 1093, 96 = Pub S NJ6°%pf6.t 40 108 108% 108 108%2-4+- 2'| extra dividends are not included. xd Ex dividend. xr Ex rights. c 
] 13% 10 ContDiamFib .40¢ 3 1034 1034 4 1034 85, 7% Insuransh Ctf .20a 10334 872 Pub S NJ $Spf St 7 1035 1035, 1033, 1033, 2 Also extra or extras. d Cash or stock. e Declared or paid so UNITED BusINESS SERVICE 1623 Walnut Street, Phitadelphie 3, Pa. 


oad Company ag is » Y - , , 

ro omp igainst the modi 49 417 C 1.60a 4 481 481 48V> 481> 4034 291 Interchem Cp 1.60 
fie i reorganization plan approved) 834, 5'% Cont Mo 60. 16 77%, 8% 7 8 114% 10914 Interch Cp pf 6 
by Federal Judge Michael L. Igoe! 33% 2659 Cont Cil Dei 1.20. 22 28g 28% 2 28Vg+ Yai 834 65% Intercon Rub 1g 


85g 85, «682 «=8l2— | 

3514 36 35 3S%a+ 7 52g 37V2 Pullman 1'2¢ 23 45¥2 45¥2 45 4515 far this year. f Payable in stock. g Paid last year. h Payable 210 Newbury St,  Baston i, Mass. Praag Bes 
10934 10934 10914 10914— 2 18 147, Pure Oi! 340 11 157, 15% 1534 157, in Canadian funds. k Accumulated dividends paid or declared 
1 


8 8 8 Ye 8 \l 247— 1934 Purity Bak 2e 1 24% 247%— 247%, 24%g4+ 4) this year. ‘Delisting pending. 


on June 30 was dismissed today by ‘ 7, 
aire cea ge pitta at «et | Property Controls 
the Circuit Court of Appeals. Jus-| Court Studies Rail Petition |Railroad following” a hearing on| Liggett Ordered to Pay More Tax|terest . and fees, the Dauphin|objected to paying the tax on its . SANDERSON & Port 


tice J. Ear! Major Said the Su- MINNE ‘OLIS. Oct. 31 UP— the petition before him yesterday. HARRISBURG. Pa.. Oct. 31 up {Cc ounty Court ruled yesterday that!1941 income on the ground that The AMERICAN ENGINEERS \ 
i x ) 





preme Court had approved all but} “******* aR ~ The railroad, which } b - the law “d APPRAISA ompany 
two phases of the plan and these| Federal Judge Gunnar H. Nordbye scathna tela a metre Paty pt —Ordering the Liggett Drug Com- aeteeien ro pod myenme _o Philadelphia prado os Sodacted Lc 
. Founded 1896 


had been met by the commission.|today had taken under advisement organizing under the 1932 Federal|Pany, a Delaware corporation, tolthe income allocated to Pennsyl-jafter its Pennsylvania income was 
Justices Evan Evans and Otto Ker-|the petition for appointment of|Railroad Reor y t, y ret 3 2 i 

a te ganization Act, The|pay the Commonwealth $3,642 in|vania in determining net income/determined and not from its entire Consu acon 
ner concurred in the opinion trustees for the Wisconsin Central|petition was filed Sept. 30. corporate net income tax, plus in-|tax.” The Liggett Company hadlincome, Hants tn Property Gee ans 


AND 


CONSTRUCTORS 





__ 8 L FINANCIAL THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. BOND SALES—CURB QUOTATIONS _ 


BOND OFFERINGS UP Named Vice President |RORROWING HEAVY s,d0b and, in ‘some cases to n-| Bb O zis TRAD ING ON NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE 


ease their a at the Re-| —— —————— sient 


Of Luscombe Airplane nH 
ER E R § rhile, ti i 
vs ~s : . U. S. Govt. Bonds. Dom. Bonds Foreign Bonds. Tot. All Bonds : as - << _ 


| , ntinued to reduce their fas saad Steck Exch Dealers =v iaaas 
a, ” lot Treasury bills, certificates and 3 P.M 4PM. |/Day’s sales veers $9,000 $5,819,900 $291,000 $6,119,900 at ben on 39 
‘notes by moderate amounts. Treasury Bid. Asked. Bid. Asked.||Monday .......-seceeseeeseeeress ++ 1,000 4,627,600 264,000 4,892,600 5 Ss $0 & 


2 Liiva 
$724,878,000 Total in 21 New : Need for Reserves Also Sends “In the following week the out-|a 3 100.17 100.19 100.17 100.19|| Year to date 5,109,800 2,137,266, 900 88,931,000 2,231,307,700 
101.31 102.1 101.31 102.1 2,802,775 -2,739,947,000 100,450,100 2,843, 199,875 


Flotations Put on the ‘ill » | Big Share of U.S. Bills Into | flow of funds from New York was/is {sve ts) tots 19212 10214, 
2 Ee | resumed and the New York City |}3i; 56-46. 104.5 104.7 1045 1047 (> = ee a St P&KC ShL 4ts41°t 
Market in Month 4 ie Hands of Federal System banks again sold a sizable amount} 3s . 103.22 103.24 103.22 103.24 Sales in Net on Net 20a AL cn 6s 45 
5 of Treasury bills to the Reserve | {/#5 ' = 2 je “ feo = i 0 $1,000.High. Low. Last. Chge. $1,000.High. Low. Last. Chge ~ ° . < : 
Bank to maintain their reserves at} >," "ITE, 403.24 103.26 103.24 103.26//CRR&B of Ga Ss 42.18 477 77 77 ‘eh Val 4195 2003 st... 7 39g 39 39 > tq Sea AL rie 4s 59 


Investment bankers offered in| ; Me ee , the required levels. Several banks, | [2 \- seeeeT 101.31 102.1 101.31 102.1 ||Cen R RN J Ss 87... 6 33% 3234 33 + YaiiLeh Val 4s 2003 st... 80 3555 35% 3559+ Sea A L rig 4s 59 ct°? 
i ‘ Increases in money circulation, q Cen RR NJ 5s 87 reg*t 1 32M 32¥q 32Mq .. \lLeh Val Term Ss Si. 1 Téte Tétq Tala Sea-All Fla 6s 35Act*t 


October the largest amount of new of obtaining | 243 -48.......... 105.29 105.31 105.29 105.31 § 
4 ( f ne coupled with a continued shift in lacking that means . B 101.14 101.12 101.14)|C&O 4¥gs 92...... 2140 140 140 + YaliLong Isl rig 4s 49... 5 10634 10612 1061+ Shell Un 2tas 54 


} 101.12 

corporate and local Government # oe Federal Reserve credit, borrowed “ 2 3 2 2 Vai! Silesian-Am 7s 41 
: ee mg s 105.31 106.1 106 106.2 | Chi & Alton 3s 49..°t 53 25% 25  25%+ YaliLong Isi rig 4s 49 st 14 1061/2 10638 1061+ 

bonds for any month since Janu- % A ; ese to private accounts which | substantial amounts from the Re- 2s 50-48 Dec...... 104.11 104.13 104.10 104.12 ooee rfg 5s 71 A J on 10844. ||Lerillard Co 3s 63.... 3 103% 103% 103% age i 

ary, 1930—$724,878,000 in twenty-| j @] \|has increased reserve _ require- Member bank bor-(|2s 51-49 Jume....T 101.25 101.27 101.25 101.27||CB&Q 4¥s 77 8 @|jLouisia & Ark Ss 69.. 3103%103 103 — S sf 

ma flotati ; Thi ount - Ce P h . eerve Beak. th ts of th 2s - $1-49 Sept....T 101.22 101.24 101.22 101.24||CB&Q gen 4s 58....... 2 110%2 110%2 110%2— Y2i|Lou&N So Jt M 4s 52 1 106% 106% 10614 Sou Pac 4¥2s 68 

ne ions. Ss amount com- wm 4 j|ments, have forced member banks/|rowings in other parts o € COUN-|5. 51.49 Dec. 101.20 101.22 101 20 101.22/|CB&Q 4s Ill 49 5 10535 1053, 10533 .. | Sou Pac Pi = 
ac 2 0 


pared with $366,224,000 in twenty-| 4 i jof the Federal Reserve System to/|try also increased during that} 31s 52-49... - 109.28 109.30 109.29 109.31||CB&Q 3¥gs Ill 49... _— 105%2 105932 ----/lmanati 

‘ ty-| ; j SUG 4s 57 82 82 Pac ; 
two offerings in the preceding} j ti ‘borrow heavily in order to main- week and total Reserve Bank loans |3Yas ee. set ng s0s.36 106.36 ies is 106 7 A tf -d 72% : ph 51 art elim & StL 4s 49....°% 105g 1054 Pes ye. * ‘ 
month and $92,515,000 for fourteen | % Itain their reserve positions, accoré- to all member banks reached $322, - |25 > > he “6 1018 1016 101.8 |\Chi Gt West 4s 88..... 5 88 .. [ee 4¥g5 71... 72 95l2 9¥2 95t2+ So Pac 4s Ore 77 
issues in October, 1943. Larger P 000,000 on Oct. 25, the largest} 15 52.50. 106.30 106.28 106.30||CMSP&Pac Ss 75... *t236 Tet Wiese Gf At Soe Sate Stet a ah 
-K- 4 4 outh Ry cn 5s 


monthly totals than October's were ing to the monthly review of the| amount since May, 1933. This fig- 2s 54- 108.23 10s 21 108.23 cMace ats to Fe s . i” ‘* IIM-K-T aj $s 67......% 2 49% a South Ry gen 4s 36 
$737,601,000 in January, 1930, and| |Federal Reserve Bank of New/|ure. still seems small compared|*> 2% 20 100.22) MASP Ais 89 C *t 32 86 — vei|M-K-T Ist 45 90 71% 1 — South Ry Mem 
ss 55- 110.13 110.11 110.13 2s tf M-K.T 45 62 B 2 @ ulig'w belt Tea 


$787,738,000 in October, 1927. In| 'York. In the four weeks ended|with the volume of member bank} ,, §3. cess 106.3 106.5 106.3 106.5 ||CM&SP 4025 89 E...°t 8 ys Mo Pac cv 5¥s 49..*t 103 Spok Int 44s 2 
CM&SP gen 4s 89...°t 25 8204+ 4 Sp 2 
Mo Pac fe, 681% 67 Stand Oil Cal 


April, 1936, $886,087,000 in bonds| Late on Oct. 25 the increase in Federal | borrowing in the | Nineteen] Twen- |2s . = 100.22 100.21 100.23 Chi & NW 4¥es 99...4127 Tite Tiedt 
, : sque 21 . 103.29 103.27 103.29)|Ch! 48 F700 
were floated, but $180,000,000 of Reserve credit was $950,000,000. ties, when the total frequently |5% 2 100.14 100.12 100.14)Chi & N W 4s 89...... 14 10534 ‘et Mo Pat ‘sie 7, Stand oi N J 234s 


the total represented Federal Land When the pressure came the|ranged between $500,000,000 and} y,, §5. 30102 101.30 102. | chi Ry as 27 ; 3 491 ||Mo Pac Ss 68 
Bank bonds. banks at first corrected their posi- | $1,000,000,000 (and reached a peak)2s__55- Bowes a cae oe 23| CRISP ov tgs o.. 93 oa. Mo Pac gen 45 75...°t 15 2514 2434 25iq+ 59) T RRA ST x 4s 53 


Of last month's new bonds, $474,- Frederick John Knack tions by selling Treasury bills.|of about $2,750,000,000 in 1920), |2}as 5¢- sees ma. CRIGP 4s 88 , 7334 73%, 73Ue+ Vql|Mohawk & Mal 4s 91. 1 695, 695_ 095g— 114 \Texark & Ft Sm StgsSo $1 y 
450,000 was for seven public utility er |Since June, last year, Federal Re-|but indicates a gradually increas-| the thane oy 4 a = on 33 ||CRI&P 4s 88 reg... *t 12 728% Th .: —, Pa } S 4¥s60 10 10834 1085 10834-+ Tex Corp 3s 65 $1 
companies, $144,400,000 for three] Appointment of Frederick John| serve holdings of such bills have|ing willingness of member banks|2q $9-56........ 100-18, 100.16 100.18) eR ee Age ce sige SSE Sustt. ilMor a Essex Ss ‘56. 3 GF toh ar”. iter & Pac Se 17 Be 
industrial loans, $82,293,000 for| Knack as vice president in charge|risen $8,600,000,000 and on Oct. 25|/to use this method of obtaining) 2%5 59-3.......... 111.7 111.6 111.8 CT, Heed inc & 0... $75" 75 °* ,. “l|Mor & Essex 4%95 55. 22 62 6ltg 6lig~ Yl Tex & Pac Ss 79 C 
ten municipalities and $23,735,000| ,¢ engineering of the Luscombe|the Reserve banks held about 70/needed reserves.” 234s pany seteeesog, Loss at. ig A 118 IIc, Un Sta 2%@s 63.... 2.100% 4... ||/Mor &Essex 3¥9s 2000. 19 $9¥2 585g SP. | Tex & Pac Ss 80 D. 
for a railroad issue. per cent of all Treasury bills ou “**e""*"F 100.16 100.18 100.16 100.18) ch & W Ind 4s S2 5 10712 10712 1072— Tex PM P Ter 339574 

\Choc Ok! & G 5s 52..*t 2 67%2 672 67%2— NASH CH&STL 4s 78. 5 9312 931% 932 .. ||Third Ave aj Ss 60 


, t- ; 2¥os 67-62.........T 100. 
Four of the flotations last month|AitPlane Corporation, Trenton, standing — nearly $11,200,000,000! INVESTMENT COMPANIES 1204s H63. oa vead 100.7 100.6 100.8 cI nT ehn 334s Th... 23 100% 10034 100%— Yyl|Nat Dairy 3s 60.... 6 107¢ 107 2107 2°” «|| Third Ave 45 60 
T 100. 
T 











es 
mNnh 
SS weno ose 
*BAAAISS > te: 
-S a> 2S > 
ees iG 








- 
Aanone 
SRELVSASaRS: 


neset 


SSSUSE= 








SSuKS oa 
>< ‘ 
@2u os 
et 2 = 4 
& 


: ) Ae ss 
were for $100,000,000 more, the) J., was announced ew out of $16,000,000,000. [238 100.5 100.3 100.5 |\cccase L 4¥9s 77 9 747 742 T43q+ 3p\|NEng RR Ss 45..." 10 9642 96%) 9615+ . 
0,000 of | by Leopold H. P. Klotz, executive 2 100.5 100.3 100.5 |\cccase L gen 4s 93... 5 103% 10315 103194 N Eng RR 45 45....-°t 16 9585 95ta 9st UN ELEV CH Ss 45*t8 
largest being $155,00 of Com- . , Equity Corporation Report as of |2¥4s 2 1004 1003 1005 | oe ‘wat NJ 8 S'2 - lm Pac ist 4s 47 
vealth Edi Cx of | Vice president of the company. Mr. Changes Are Traced \n3s 72. T 100.13 1001S 10012 100 14{{Cle” Sh Line 4¥qs 61. 3 109% 109 109944 Junct 45 86 reg... 10 92 92 92 Un Pac 1 
ee ne |Knack resigned recently from the Sept. 30: Net assets were ee | . : ’ Clev Un Term Ss 73... 14103 102¥2103 =... ||N Orl & NE 409s 52.. 5 103% 103% 103%4 Un Pac 3tgs 80 
Chicago 8 per yey ret mortgage |Fairchild Aircraft division of the| “As the total amount of Treas- lent to $90.78 a share on the $3) ties 49-48 aes worry — > eur eT ee ¢ site + ie IN O Team S . “t ¢ ieeye "aie 105¥2+ hg e, - " 
bonds, due in 1977. This was part); airchild Engine and Airplane|Ury bills held by member banks convertible preferred stock and|!¥es 47- 00.19 100.21 100.21 100.23)| th AF + ‘ies S seste 105¥ 105%4. talIN 0 Toca as st Me ava a3 + oy es - 
of a $180,000,000 issue, the bal- . ‘orporation and later as engineer has diminshed,” said the review, to $1.44 a share on the common | TRE ASURY BOND SALES Columbia G 5s 61.. 1 1051% 105Vg 105Yg— 39/|NO Tex&M Ss 54Bct*t 8° 80. $0 — Univ Pict 334s 59 
ance going directly to insurance |; charge of the company’s engi- “the number of banks able to ad- stock, against $90.74 and $1.47) ee os ole || Gonewith ed o Sis 2 iis = = + % i en & sec" 80%, 8012 80+ winesmiam BY wie 
companies in exchange for other!) .oring office at 101 Park Avenue|just their reserve positions to meet] on June 30 last and $82.22 and opts Net l\Con Edis 3¥qs 48... 6106 104 106 + \AlINY & Putnam 4-93... 3 Gots ott cord ’ 
securities of Commonwealth Edi-|).7¢ “He is an Associate Fellow|Currency demands, increased re-| $1.14 on Sept. 30, 1943. __$1,000.High. Low. Last. Choe. |icon Edis 3¥gs 56..... 2105 105 105 + SalINVC rg Ss 2013.4... $3 74K 74g Tatat WABASH Atgs 91 
—_ of the Institute of the Aeronautical|Serve requirements, and transfers| American General Corporation—|?s  54- 5 100.12 100.12 100.12 Con ~ = 7 4 “ 2 eave ee oon tal/NyC 4s 2013 A 40 69% ¢ 6913 ae , oi 
Stock offerings last month to-| guiences lof funds, through the sale of bills} Report as of Sept. 30: Net assets |7%2° 70-65...........1 41002 100.2 100.2 —2 a Aa tes 6. t 108V) 108% 108¥4 " ov i ay hennty Po Warren Ry 3% 2000 
taled $37,407,000 for eight new is-/|_ sia ito Reserve banks, has likewise were $147.82 a share on the pre- one . Federal umes Quotations after|| cuba No Ry Stes 42rctt 2 50 SO 50 + %SlINYCRHR Nos hota 97% West Shore 4s 2361 
sues, against $52,649,000 for eight| \diminished. Correspondingly, there ferred stock and $11.83 on the GEM NEES, SOG Ct 8. BON _____.|| Cuba RR 7Ygs 46 ret.t 2 50 SO 50 + ¥aliNYC La Sh 3¥s 98 2 792 79% 791% 0 = ry} reg 
the month before and $24,780,000/issues in the corresponding period|has been an increase in the num-| common stock, against $148.09 | N. Y. CITY BOND ||Curtis Pub Je S5...... $402 102 102 — “iinvewasac sie nek 0 tad tr ta West Md Svs 77A 
*LC P 94: y ¥ ‘ ' j a j . | ! v2s 4 1073, + Mestn ‘ 2 
for four in October, 1943. last year. Flotations so far this|ber of banks which have adopted} and $11.87 on June 30 last, amd} 20.” —_—_— ———-|| DAYTON P & L 3s 70. 2106% 106¥a l06Yat %e||NYCHI&StL 419s 78.... 15 102 10134 102 + oo or é 


Detailed comparisons of bond|year were the largest for any like|other methods of obtaining needed $136.83 and $10.35 on Sept. 30, | Sales in Net |/Del & Hud 4s 63..... 11 98 Val|N Y Connect 3s 65.. 14 108% 108% 10814+ Western Un Ss Si 
and stock offerings here in October |ten-moénth period since 1936, when|reserves—chiefly sales of Treasury 1943. $1,000. High. Low. Last. Chge. D&RG 4s 36....°18 23 53% 33 sub 1 IN Y Dock 4s 51. 10 9814 977%, 98 Western Un 5 60 


rs | mo : se3 . 7 1 y |D&R G West 5s 55.°t 1 434 434 434 IN Y Lack&W 419s 73. 3 871% 87% 871 7 me on 
for three years follow $4,093,601,000 in 573 issues reached |certificates of indebtedness and/| Utility Equities Corporation—R Te 113 4 1134 11344 Odd ‘par G W 5s $5 asd.*t 81 4% 3% set “SelINY LackeW 4s A 3 gore soi s0te+ West aK, ie 3. 


— a ' 
BONDS the market. More than a billion| borrowing from the Reserve banks. port as of Sept. 30: Net assets | F — jo &RG West 5s78.°t 56 48 46% 48 1¥2||NYNH&H cv 6s 48..°t 12 S5¥q SS SS¥9+ Wheel Sti 3s 66 
(000 qmitted.) jdollars of this year’s figure was/In the three weeks ended Oct. 11,/} were $121.51 a share on the $5.50 DOMESTIC BON DS Det Ed 3s 70 cz 3106 106 106 $ Va\|NYNHG&H cit 6s 40°18 11 88%q 88 8814+ Wis Cen 4s 49 
. sizi‘iso s32 200 ™ |for offerings since Sept. 1, last. |weekly reporting member banks in| priority stock, compared with|-———— aero | eedhag ry Messe jo teste a os _"yl wren ‘a @.. *t a S3¥2 $3, S3¥e+ Wis Cen 45 S&D 36 
Eidutct inicinl EAB Geos BA), Offerings of stock in the first/101 cities not only reduced their) $121.88 at the end of June and “eo0.high. Low. Last. che. |)” NY. O18 Wrfg 442 § Telp tele Hale." YOUNG S&T Stas 60 
Raliroad —s 23.735 15.000 9500/ten months of 1944 aggregated|holdings of Treasury bills by $360,-| $113.88 a year earlier. |ABITIBI P&P Ss $3018 § 88% 88% O01 5,|/E TEN V&G cn Ss & 1115 115 115 .. |IN Y¥ Tel 3t4s 67. 1 1081/4 108% 1081%4— 3 ~ 
sens 30,500 | $312,396,000, representing sixty-|000,000, but also made net sales of | Keystone B-4 Fund—Report as of| Adams Exp 4s 47 st ; 9 5 le Ble Bet EY AH, a 5s 65.. J rd oe =. - iat, 0 Pen to 0 8 31 = igo : _FORE IGN 


Total $724,878 $92,515 $65,015 | four issues, against $99,069,000 for/$280,000,000 of certificates and/ Sept. 30: Net assets were $15,-/Alb P Wrap 6s 48..... 1100 100 100 . Norf Sou 41/5 98. 284 84 84 
STOCKS |\twenty-two issues in the same/|Smaller amounts of Treasury bonds| 184207, or $9.32 a share, com- tens po pats RS Hod ote ++ ** || PIREST’NE T&R 3s 61 1 10334 10334 10334 .. ||Norf & W 4s % 10132 132 132 4 ales in 
Type (000 omitted) sqqz, [Period of 1943. This year’s emis-|and notes. Borrowings, which had| pared with $8.66 a share OM|am & For P Ss 2030.. 16 91% 91t 9114 =, Fla E Cst Ss 74....°¢ 32 Si%m 51% Si%—+ od _ bs as mes “” one ~~ ove EARL Se _ S00 
Industria! “tie $37,407 $16.500 §2,500| sions to date were the largest for|been largely paid off before the| Sept. 30, 1943. Am T & T 314s 66.... 51082 1083 108124 \INor Pac Ss 2047 D.... 4 87S¢ 87% S7%—— ve ANTWERP Ss S8......1 
Public utility -_++-+ 8,280 any corresponding time since 1937,|end of September, increased sub-| Keystone S-1 Fund—Report as of ~ SB ‘ SE... 000 36 122% 122% 1227+ a (GEN fo yg » * nee Brg — MAl|Nor Pac 41s 2047... 13 803, 80 80 fe ce oe ig 
Total $37,407 $24,780 $2,500| when $438,504,000 in 165 issues/|Stantially in the final week of that Sept. 30: Net assets were $24.54 pos woe 7 16°" _ a a —_* ral lees con ‘%s. "*+ 10 Eth ite tha ~~ oes “ AA en E yn ne et Australia Ss S7..... 
The number of bond and stock}was marketed, Period. a share, against $23.64 on Sept.| Armour & Co 314s 64.. 61031 103% 103% ., ||Ga Car & Nor 6s 34. “8 test 106s 106344 INor Pac 3s. 204% reg.. 11 654 6554 653 esamghngbon 


~ : “ » week ende ; > 7 3 t 1 \|Goodrich 444s 56 : 2 , > > 
issues offered in October for three) on the week antes OS. 25 et: aa wae JATESF 45,95. ” 10 126 #12584 12586 nt \\Gt Nor Ry Stas 82 S2.... 1119%g 1192 119%... ||Nor Sta Pow 3¥gs 67.. 1 1072 107¥2 107% BRAZIL 33% 
years follow: Brazil 6Vs 27-57 








‘ 




















Exchange of Stock Voted outflow of funds from New York AT&SF aj 4595 st...) 1115 115 115 |. (Gt Nor 5S 73.....scce 1 126Nq 126% 1261 .. | 7-5 
BONDS | Stock oo ‘eneral ‘ | City to other parts of the country Finch Telecommunications att & Birm 45 33.516 2 65 64 65 A Gt Nor 4¥qs 77 E..,... LUMg IM illyy .. |JOGDENSL C 4s 48.°18 9 18 18 = 18 Brazil 394s 6 ser 
ONL La Stockholders of the General Time | was interrupted temporarily by a r. AC Line Ist 4s 52.... 20106 10534 10534-- 1|Gt Nor 45 46 G..-..... 17103 102% 103 + Okla G&E 3345 66 8 105% 1057, 105% Brazil 334s 18 ser 

1944 : k P ay Finch Telecommunications, Inc.,)) 6 (iM oy ge 52° “4 10534 10555 10534 4 ||Gt_Nor 3348 67......00 9 105Y2 10539 10512 .. Buen A 439s 77... 


Instruments orporatic vo tel inflow , os . 
— Corporation ted| substantial inflow, probably asso- |Passaic, N. J., announced yesterday |, ¢ Line cit 4552 cid.. 2 104% 104% 104% .. | Gulf M&Oh inc 2015.... 18 87 862 87 + PAC GAS & EL 3s 70. 1 104% 1041 104124 Buen A 45gs Apr 76 


here yesterday to approve an au-/cjated with payments for large|that George H. Payne, James H. R.|A € Line 4s 64...... 55 90g 8912 Wle+ 7p Pac G & E 3s 71..... 6 1045g 1043g 1045,— aa 
& E 3345 61... 6 107% 107% 10775 -ANADA 4s 60 


E 4s 64..... 410634 10612 106344 1%4|\Canada 3s 68 


State and municipal 1 

Railroad : ;|thorized issue of 50,000 shares of|new issues of corporation securi-|Cromwell and Ray Littlefield had |At! & Dan Ist 4s 48.. 1 41 41 41 — 114) HARLEM RIV&P 4s54*t 1m 107%e od © 
sheeeeens - 

Pp 

Pp 


Miscellaneous . v ‘ f-- ee ' ; & 
Total > ue witm% per cent $100 par preferred | ties. Consequently some New York|pbeen elected directors by the stock-| & Dan 264546... 235 35 3S + teh a , 4 un ~ rivet VellPen P & Lt ates 74.. 210994 100% 109mh4. t4)|Chile Mt. Bk6\2sS7 asd? 
t anions stock, of which 38,539 shares are | City banks acquired substantial holders and that Dr. James L.| Ist me s st.. By, 9% WW “7. \|Hud&Man inc Ss S7...¢ 91 272 27Vq 27Va+ Vqi|Pen P & Lt 319s 69.. 1 108%2 108%) 108%2— 1% Chile 6s 60 
‘ : 1942, to be exchanged for outstanding 6|amounts of Treasury bills, the! Bradford had been re-elected presi- | 





A 
8 
8 
8 
B 
B 
B 
B 








0 
- nek. Sens bP By : ‘ = oP = at 3 | Pen RR gen Ss 68 .... 1126 126 126 a o > he gl 
Industria “8 2 i per cent preferred stock on the|total for all weekly reporting|dent. Mr. Payne is a former com-|g & 0 2000 s 16 S5tq 5434 55 *T Sf)/me Bete ve aes SH. 2 101% 101% iot% — Boe ys = 2 ‘ete ese ne. MiiChile 6s 61 Sept asd.t 
Public utility ‘ ibasis of one new share and $7 in| banks in the city showing a net|missioner of the Federal Com-| O 9 st F........ 4 55% 55 5539+ , ai jm beige pinche Ha 831% pd Pen RR gen 414s 81 .. 10116 11534 115394— Chile & 63 — ’ 
Total ‘cash for each present share. The|increase of $165,000,000 in that/munications Commission; Mr.|  $ v fp teeseed rt rite see. 4! Cen rig 4s 55...... 1 85¥g 852 8512+ %e|/Pen . 1 108V% 108% 108%, Coe at 7. 
New bond offerings in the ten|company plans to redeem all unex-| week. The distribution of funds|Cromwell is a former United States |ggopieawy 45 Si si. 7 89%¢ 893% 803¢— 14||Ill Cen 434s 66........ 25 S6e+ eo 4 veg | te a 4 
months ended on Oct. 31 amounted/ changed 7 per cent shares on Jan.|was uneven, however, and other| Minister to Canada, and Mr. Little-/8&0 S W 50 st 74g 73 74+ 412) brie S63 A... 2 Tat Bil peoria & East 4s 60.. 10 7659 765% 765—— 24 DENMARK Ce 
to $1,983,008,000 for 165 issues,/1 or soon thereafter at $110 a share | banks found it necessary to make/field is a banker of Providence, | Sang 72 a. Soe ne on + *yq|{tne Gt Nor aj 6s 52.*F 18 ““yg!|Pere Marq Ss S6..... 21104) 104 104124 14)|Denmark 495 
pee with $987,374,000 for 128; and accrued dividends. further sales of See certifi-|R. I. Beth Sti 304s et 10635 10635 106%, ||Int Gt Nor Ist 6s S2.*t 31 S6¥, , Athy Ky, TPS ! je I ms + WEDELLIN M 
|Boston & Me Ss 67... $108 103 103 + ivp|int AE ae 27 74g T2Ve T3VRL. ANg||Phila Co 4¥qs 61°... 12 108% 1081 108Y2 Fe Pie 
| Boston & Me 4¥2s 70.¢ 16 603g 592 6035+ Ky lint Paper 5s 47 1 103 103% 103% .. | Phil Elec 3's 67 15 106% O63 166 ~ = ——- A j 


S_ 931 5 +4. 
TRANSACTIONS ON N EW YORK CURB EXCHANGE crates (PES JEW e gate gees aise ase: 
| Bkiyn Un Gas 6547, .+. 25 111Vg11154g 111546 — %p || !nt 56 95l2 95 95i44 V4)lPh Read C&l S73 st°t 1S 72 71% 72 + 14) PERNAMBUCO 75 
a ——== | Bklyn Un Gas 5545... 1 101954g1014¢101'%e+ ! it || lowa Cen rig 4s S1..°t 2 412 4% 4% .. || Philip Morris 3s 62 2 108% 108% lester Peru ist 6s 60 
Buf R& P ST st 52 61% 6 + ||Philippine Ry 4s 37.°tS 2 15% B+. 15¥e+ Peru 2d 6s 1961 
Net TUESDAY, OCT. 31, 1944 | Stock and Div’ Sis. Be ch Bush Term 5s 55...... 8 86 8534 86 + t2 Sve a 59. R 1% BJ s ae oll ete ee Bg 3 — — Poland 8 50 
| i i e. | roe Y Y | ‘ 2934 12954 " ‘ 
2 Alt Lh RT 1 100% 100%4 10044 Yq||4onesdLaugh St Yas 61 15 103%4 103%4 104+ Mall o ee Coes & Ir Als S22 103V4 103% 1033)— Yq [SAO PAULO ST 7:40" 











Stock and Div’d Sis. 
_in Dollars. 100s. First. High. Low. Last. Choe Sales unofficia Stocks. Domestic Bonds. Foreign Bonds. Total Bonds . VEE 3 = = | } oy 
ACF BRILL WRt 2 2¥7 22 2% 2+ %~| Day 2 $555 72, otary c a 14s 14¥e 14¥e+ RE POW 4566... 3 10555 10554 1055, .. |KCFS&MEM 4s 36°tS S77 77 77... ||Pitt Steel 4tgs SO... 7104%2104 104 .. | |Serbs Cts SI 7s 62 
Air Assoc 80a.t 5 115, 1214 118— 12iq+ 14 _ = a_—€,€, oe — om Ryan Aero .j5e.f 6 5 5 § ‘8 5| cat Net Ry a¥e ST. 8 1165p 1165p 1165. |. |K C South Ss 50 20 93% 92> 93U%4 Yo||Pitts & WVa digs SBA 4 74 731g 734— 1%4|| vy in 19 
Airc Access ....1 49 634 67% 634 634 .. | Monday receesereseeees 187,915 405,000 2,000 [Ryerson & Haynest 10° 3Y Me Yel Can Pac 419s 60 20 10455 10414 1045.4 Sgi|K C South 3s 50 26 913% 91 913+ 3/|Pitt & WVa 4tgs 60C12 7S 75 78 —1 | aj Wes 7 
Allied Prod A13gtz50 281 2812 2812 2812 Year to date. 57 415,142 146,443,500 8,957,000 155,400,500 | = lCan Pac 4s perp 8 947% 9412 942— 3g\/K C Term 4s 60...... ayy gr .. |{Portl Gen E 4¥zs 60.. 2105 105 105 — ‘a\warsaw cITY 7s sat 
Alum Lid hB..2450 843 oD El itn meee eer erm e eR renee ae a i. ||ST LAWRN pf hi 17% Ye Cen of Ga Ss 59.C...°t 3 113— 113% 11394 39||Koppers Co 3¥9s 61.... 5 105% 10512 105t2 
Alum Co Am 2. 7 34% 35. 341% 35 ; St Regis Pap... Sie SY2 + Cen of Ga cn Ss 45°18 2 48 48 4B = MGI READING 41s 97 A.. 3106 10534 106 . HT xin x interest. ct 
Alum Co Am pf6z3S0114 114 11334 11334— 14 || Stock and Div’d Si Net || Stock and Div’d Sis, Net |/Sait Dome Oil..4 812 SiCen Ga Mobile Ss 46°t 1 32 32 32 "| |LAC GAS Sis S3.. 3 10034 1001/2 100%g—~ 14||Reading 4s 97 B.. 1 105% 105% 10512 jration of ownership 
Alum Goods .60e 2 191% 191% 193% 193g— % in Dollars 100s First. High _Low. _Last Chge in Dollars. 100s First. High. _Low Last. Chge || Samson Unit t 434 . Cen New Eng 4s 61.°t 9 9614 9614 9614+ 34) \Lautaro Nit inc 75... 5 53 53 53 on Rdg Jer Cen 4s 51 16102 10112 102 + pg ldefauit. SMatured bon 
Am Cen Mfg.60et 2 10 10 10 10 | ee iy rs 1 a. , 2 a oe 3 63 \ |Savoy Oil .....1 Cen N Y Pow 3345 62.. 4 10412 1041/2 10412 Leh CEN 4195 S4C.... 5105 105 105 — iiRio Gr W cit 4s 49.°t 1 59 59 59 jmaturity In bankruot 
Am CP&LA3.44kz250 4012 40¥2 40 40124 Yqiicm,© Dot 0g.) 8 ‘ Lamson Corp *, J Ho a $e Set iiss (2 Ad..? [Cen Pac Ss 60 21 96 ©9434 «96 «+ 1 Leh Val NY 4s SO.... 3 74¥q 74Uq 74Vg— VIII Ark & La 41/9534" 18 10 48% 48 «48 lreorganized under th 
Am Cit P&LB..1 4 338 3t2 3Me 3% . Crystal oir Ref.. 1 Vq\|Leonard Oi! Devt 30 138 13, 138 138 .. ame £ . : |Cen Pac Ist 4s 49 7 107 106%4 106%— 4iiLehigh Vai Ss 2003 st.. 4 45% = ba Lonel Ist 1 41°18 9 oi 15¥e 151 jassumed by such 
Am Cyan .60.... 12 3534 3534 3 35%2 Crystal Oi! R pf..z10 2 3 j|Line Material Ve 115 15 15 15 ° |Scullin Sti Voe..4 Be Woe , . 

6 

8 


Am & Fon P war 12 % 4 Yis— “6 Cuban A Sug 3e 3g||Lionel Corp’ .80at 334 1334 1334 13% . ec Corp Gen Ye 
y ' ; tsiltome ‘St Gas 400 6 1094 1084 1084 10%+" Ye wiimsnau sh " DIVIDENDS ANNOUNCED] BOND AVERAGES U. s. GOVERNMENT AND AGENCY BONDS 











~ 


NS 
nN 
—AMw = & ww wiv 


Am Gas & E/1.60 6 3114 313% 31Y%g— e'icuban Tob 
Am Laun Mach 2 33 33 3 33 + % Long Is Ltg 2 1 1 1 1 . 5 

3 , Y ‘ ; eiberling R | 
Am Light &T1 0 6 17% 18 18 + 38) navton RUB It 2 2 3g||Long Is L pf 225 71 71 71 71 + 3% Selby Shoe — 
Am Maracaibo..t 17 1 Dayton Rub A 21220 : 3 g |Long !s L pf B.2250 24 6534 61% O5\4+ 2% Selected Indus. .t 


- | 

‘| memEEW OCTOBER, 1944 2 - TREASURY NOTES INSULAR BONDS 

Am Republicstget 7 5 n ME VY 1 7 3 . . utstanding — W 

Am St nema ae pL roa ~ “7 oe ae s : : h Louis L&E 40.178 Th 8 7¥2 Tht 48 ipueet pa o. / ’ te ian Be. Pay. Hidrs of Domestic Bonds | Millions — ee vs 

. nn WV ec 75 75 y Co any : 1 ’ ~ . . >t pines 
7 N93 dl 1 18 B Ye Derby 0 pf 29V2kt240 79%, - 79V% *\McCORD CORP..t 3 6% 67 6% 6% u||Shat- A ret * 2/9 Bl a 1 2c -2? 11-13 oa nad “hge.|2,1269Mar., '45.0.90 0.71 0.690.69 a. A AS. 
nc Os Ilse ‘ ° ‘ s -_ 2 ~ - Com- R 7 - 

Apex EI “ Mio 1 ‘a Det Gray Ir : 2 Ss 158 ay _ 40 Saal ps pi 4 ps ea is iSherwin-Wms 3... 1102 102 102 o Accumulated trisie. itles blood 718 Mar., *45.. %10).5 100.7 0.15 ~ : ul 
E|Powpf ne > ; 4 1m 1% Ibe ||Sherw-Wms pf 5.210 113¥ 11319 113% ++) | Pitts Steel 5t4% pf $1.37% ~1 1-17 91.69 100.92 92.89 94.30 — .07/1,6061Mar., '45..1%4 100.7 100.9 0.57) Puerto Ri ‘ n. 1956 

Appai EiPowp fa 14 Diana Strs .80..¢ 9 12 2 12 — ¥||Michigan Sug 5 1% 138 1% 138+ Silex .70e .... 1425 15Vg 153— 15% —: : 100.95 92.70 94.26 ’ maS., TW. -i% ‘7 100.8 51 = —s 


Argus Inc .10e V%4 c 1 ? 1 5|\Mich Sug pf 40k. 5 8% 8% 87a+ ‘ : : Interim F aha ta 101.02 92:85 94.46 20 | ’ FY 
at ae Gas Divco Corp tge.t 11 Met g||Mich Sug p 8 4||Simplicity Pat..t 1 3 3 ie V9 | aoe oe fe tal 5311Dec., '45.. % 99.31 100.1 0.75 TREASURY BILLS 


1 
1 
70 
. 8 
“stat 3 Ye\iDom Ind A 3ge.t 1 Sig Yg\|Micro Hone .35et 5 1434 1434 1434+ Sin: Unt Mol A Dep Rec. . .714% . : f g 
p= cs ; “ ger Mfg 6a... “" 10.279 279 «(279 3 ni Mol Amer De; 2 ; : ; ; 
Ark Wat Gas A. 3 _**,,||Dom Textile hS..210 63 63 "}26V9||Mid St PB vic.. 1 2p 2% 24 --. || SiouxCityG&E pi 7210 112% 112% 112% 2M Extra . Ff 72 102-06 93.20 94-93 + 26/1,2011Mar., '46..1 100.4 100.6 0.89 
; ‘04|3,2619Dec., °46. .1% 100.25 100.27 1.11} 
1 
1 
1 
1 





Nw eee eS 


(Subject to Federal taxes) 
For discount at purchase 


210 Nov 9 
205 Nov 
209 Nov 
210 Nov 





Ark NGas pfl.15k “%q Mid W Corp .20et 23 115— 12% 129+ : c 
Gas pf 18k e+ §||Sotar Airc Ve..t 55 5% 5% SY %4| Jewel Tea Ce 40c 2-20 12- —— So 
Are Equip 708 Mileacr casar.. 6 2 . ; \|Midi Oil cvpf3gkt 2 16 16V%, . Sonotone .20 ..t 10 2% 3 . | Kresge (S$) Co : 20¢ 2-12 coors OOM 100.97 93:44 }1,9487Mar., "47..1%100.9 100.111 12) 
2,707{Sept., '47..14% 100.26 400.28 1.19) 


Art Met Wks.60T 101.06 
3,7481Sept., '48..14 100.18 100.20 1.34 
El Bd & Sh pf 6 B ‘ 7 R Midw P&S 1.40etz50 24 4 + te St Pow & Lt.... ” * 


‘Ashland O&R .40t 4 
Asso Brew Canh2 2 
Atias Corp war.t 1 1 . 
3 EIB&S$5 ofS 5 " MinnM&M 1.05e as 6% er ||St Pw&LB.. 1 : ad Initial apes ' + Certificates of Indebtedness 
VWiEIP AL 2pfA.2250 ” ‘ 3% Molybdenum get 8 Bp + St Pow & L pf. 1 2 [Inglis Co, Ltd 25¢ : ; eee : ] 4.41 95.6 3,540"Dec., ‘44 0.08 204 \Dec. 
Elgin Nat W ge 1 34% 3412 3412 34¥q., ||Monogram Pict..1 1 3% 3¥e— YelStand Sil-Lead + 30 | “’ |Sun Kraft, Ine, A 1249¢ ft 30...) $982 1oLes 9408 09/5,0481Feb., '45.. % 0.62 214 Dee 


Va\lEast G&F 6 pf3k.275 ‘e Mid! St n-cum 2.750 24% 24% 2444— Pg iSo Penn Oil 1.60 2 4134 41% . |ionel Corp - 10¢ 1 
& 
1, 
Atlas Ply .70¢ 6 11. 
1 
2 - yj 1 
“YallEquity Corp ...t 7 _||Mount Prod Y.. 1 6% 6% M4 ++ |Starrett Corp vict 6 3% ie \s Year End }Oct, 21:2.) 93.91 10099 94.12 95.73 5/4.876/Apr., "45 0.73 0.710.71/1,215 Dee 
. - ° 1, 
1 
1 
1, 
1, 
1,3 


‘ > 250 283 283+ %8) one 
E G&F pr pf 4¥9.2125 2 Midvale 1¥ge....250 2835 8 ||Spaiding .......? 1 11% 11% Yj |Neisner Bros......... 23 
( 3 % 8) 10 

El Bond & Sh... 45 Midwest Oil 34.1 4 8% S%a+ Val\spencer Sh Sgt S$ 5 5 5 16 | Sebzoeh | Bosh 
,/5|So0 Texas Coml Nat Bk...$2.50 


SESESER SBR 
BSae3 228 


Auto V Machiget 2 


Automat Pr.40txd 
“ 
Avery & Sons'/zet 8 
jEquity $3 pf 3k..250 8 Steel Co Can h3.270 1% |Am Serv Ce $1.73 101.00 93.85 § ‘ a 
BABCOK &WiILIe 20 .. |/Eversharp 1.20a.. 3 b | NACHM CORP le 1 1914 1914 19%4 19%4— Yallcteriing Inc .10gt 4 "\|Biaw Knox Co 10¢ 101.05 93.81 1,615{May, °45.. % 0.74 218 Dec 
Baldwin Locowart 22 1% 8 NatBelHess .0Set 235 2¥q 24 ++ |IStetson (JB) le. .225 _|Bwe Corp Am er’ * os Se Se 4,770iJune, '45.. % 0.78 217 Jan 
: ; - M bs . 4 ° 2 ’ 
ra ,312 Jan 
a 


1 
§ 6 
ri tl t 3 % 3 3344. I 1 Nat Fuel G .80.. 9 113 11% 11% .. Swyer Steel Cast 100.80 93.55 ; 
Barium Sti . 32 3 Ye FAIRCHILD tet 9 1 8 iStinnes (H) .... 1 ‘ Ye|Universal Cons Oli 75e 0.80 
1 


100.70 93.45. 95.13 5\|2,5117Aug., °45.. 7 

100.71 93.59 ; 13, 694! Sept., 45 > 0.81 0.7907 
100.45 93.6: i) ee . te i 
100.69 9381 9 |3,49270ct., '45.. % 0.82 0.800.8 
§Subject to Federal aes 


313 Jan. 
308 Jan 
311 Feb 


Basic Refrct.30et 14/|Fairchild E.20g.% 12 4 oe Nat RubMch 3get 10V%4 10V%q 101%g+ Y%)) wan-Finch 0 4 i { i al ) 
Beau Brum’! .85et - Falstaff Br .60a.t 1 8 Nat Sug Ref 1.20¢ 2334 «2: 2334 Be | i i$ O vee gy £2 - Ay eR. w shrs, - 
— Airclget Ve |Fansteel M Vagt 65 357 5% 37 oe oo oe 9% $7e+ %8) TAMPA EL 1.60. 2 22 Yq | West Chio Gas Co 15¢ 
erk&Gay Furn.t , Fedders Mfg ..t 3 |e fun “nes 4 e . Z **,. || Technicolor Vee... 25 2 2 3 Regular SE ( 

Birds S Fay Yet Yq |Fire As Phil 2a.. 1 4 Navarro Oil 1Yget 2 28 28g 28 28Ye-+ Mliticnman Realty.4 19 9 — Yelam Roll M >> tou eS 
Bliss (E W) 1.. Ford M Can Ahi 2 2 le 1 NEPA 6% pf 4ktz25 63 63 63 + % ae Lux .10e.t § } .. |Am Service ptf ++. .95.77 Oct 
Blue Ridge .10¢.- wd Fuller (GA) 2g..¢ 4 a. N Eng T&T _4Vge.210 112 112 112 112 +1 lTranswest. 0 leet 3 , %|Am Service pf A ‘ 

jue Rid cvpf3dt : \Fuller $3 cv 3g..tz10 ie N J Zinc 3e.... 166 6 6 6 — hal lTri-Cont’war ..? 1 i i |Am Steel Fdrys 
Bium’thal(S).20et 1, N Y Auction .30ef 1 S¥Q St H ; i} = = a Se pf 
Bowm-Bilt H.... %||GEN FIN .20a..t 2 f\|NY Merchan .60tz150 15 15 1 ; ll UDYLITE CP.200t 8 4 ~ . 
Bowm-Bilt H 1 pf 13g||Gen Share pf 6dtz40 || NY Spbd fdsh3et 3 16% 17 167% Te Ulen Realiz ver i i) Belding Sorticellt. Lid pf.$1 < 
Bowm-Bilt H 2 pf Yo||Glen Al Coall.20e 12 ¥g||Niag Hud Pow..t 67 35g 435g 433g «633g Ve) Unexcelied Mfg 7 Blaw Knox Co iSe 
Braz Tr L&P 2e M% yp! toe 2 ig ||Niles-Bem-P INge 14 13Yg 1335 1345 13% .. llunit Aire Prod 1t 8 : Buckeye Pipe L 20 
Brewst Aero ..? ; Gt Atl&P nv 334e.225 iNipsing M h.l0gt 1 2 2 2 2 oe Unit Cig-W Strst 6 , | Butler Water 7 7 ~ , 350 
Bridgpt Oil t Yq |Gt Nor Pap 1.60.z50 3 3 2 iNoma Elec We.t 8 14% 14% 1434 14%4— A lUn C-W S pt Skt2S0 Fe ney Bid . gD oo 

Brillo Mfg 1...t Uctober, 1944 
Brown-F Dist... 


at et et tt tt 
ere 


U. S. BONDS FEDERAL LAND BANK BONDS 

Outstanding | Rid 
Millions Bid. Ask. | 157 34s, May, 1955-45 a 
50 Panama 3s, 1961... 133 134 |230 3s July, 1955-45 LOLs 10148 0 2 
. 74.31 Mar. Sept.11 72. 13 Conversion 3s, 1947 105% 105% |171 3s. “Jan. 1956-46 ony $ . 
73.42 Jan. , 16 Conversion 3s, 1946 seee++-103 103% 1171 3s, May. 1956-46 








034 103 
14a 10 


AVERAGES 


= & 
pba! lt. le aden 


22D OOO a >> 


Greenf T&D Vag. 15 4 No Am Lt & P. 2 %y 9 %% ht Yollunit Gas ...... ‘ "yg | City of N Castle Wir pif. $1.50 : 64.84 
No Am L & P pfz25107 107 107 107 —2 |linit Gas war. ° 4 Z ex | Cons Edison (NY) 40 2-15 930. 2 : ; ; en 
HALL LAMP .60e 1 No Am RayAl¥get 1 32g 32%2 32¥2 32¥2— VYallinit LtgPow A. 16 2 Vg |Cons Laundries 25c : “15 Daily Range , Date 
a tee Ivze..t 1 25 7 Northeast Air! ..1 2 1014 10%4 10% 1014 --. |lUnit Li&Pow B. 2 Curtis Pub pf 75¢ 93.60 May 3 89.24 Aug. RAILROADS (25 Stocks) Oct. 28 
Ve cla M ‘ ‘8. No Ind PS 5 pf Sz25 1041 10412 1041 104424 38 ||1), ; 2 dhe Griesdieck West Bwg pf 34%c 92.98 Dec. : 92.90 Oct. 30 102 1 
g |Hecla Min 1. 3 8 & 8 a ap 145 j\Unit Lt&P pf, 9 . Hamilton Cotton . 89.75 Dec. 30 85.52 Jan ‘ J High Low Last Change. Oct. 31 102 40 
Heller pf St “tat 1041 »||No Sta Pw A... 1 145g 1458 1458 .. |i Unit Sh M 2¥a.2125 7 7 % Hanna (M A) Co pf....$1. ae ‘ Oct ; 30°09 : oo. 
Heyden Chem 80 1 19 . 2 : Unit Sh M pfll.250 . Harbison Walker R pf $1.50 YEARLY RANGE t. 3 vette 085 3064 1-4 ~ quuens 9 feene 
CALAMBA SUG.. Vg iHorn & Hard 750 30 2 . - 4 OGDEN CP 3get 3 42 4% 4%. US Foil B .30e 5 4 |Heyden Chem Corp 20c Industrials Utilities. | 4 31.13 7 31.01 ? RAILROADS (25 § 
Cal El Pow .40 Hubbell H 1.60.t2150 221 Okla Nat Gas 2t 1 28¥2 282 282 28%2+ %|| R ri : : 1, |Heyden Chem Corp pf, A... .$1 5 a os ? ILROAL 
: tng ro Boy ~ tee 4 | Jewel Tea 25¢ 101.51 Aug. 29 94.41 Oct. 18 31.60 3132 31.46 High. Dat 
Callite Tung.20et 7 Yei|Humble Oil 142... 6 39% j 397 PAC GRE Gof ive 4 ’ |U S Rub Rec! 1 , 16 ieee. 8 o' on BS . 3 133 i 48 igh. D 
Can ~ h.04e. 1 1 ‘s : p : Aan Be oi y ; 2 ; d J 8 rege Stores ll he ‘« Lionel Cor Pp. a ‘i 20 |s0.08 Jan. 3 0.86 Jen. 4 onan aint 
Tr 35 5 ] Ww J a . r4 » + | : - P i 4 aie ; 
Casco Prod ig..t 1 , ' g /ILt POW 1019 3 Univ Pict le 4 ither Manufacturing cciodiiatiinae ‘sini: amenie unde: ‘ty eaanee | z 
1944. High.Date. Low. Date Last. ) a ee a Jan. 
95.77 1 3 95.4 } ¥ 1} : 1 25 94 Dex 


Buckeye P L .80 
Buf N&E P of.. 
Burma Ltd ie 
Burry Biscuit ..f 





wets 


©20LD OO Of 
ty» 


we wy 
~SSen Su, 


Catalin Am .10et 29 8 Vg |IIt Pow div ct..t 10 141% Prkrsbg R&R lat ; 8\|Utah-Id Sug .15e 27 b Ve Midwest ou 374 
Cen & SW Ut.. 9 Vag ||I11 Pow pf 45gk.t si. : Pennroad V9. ‘8\\Utah P&L pf... 225 7 | [Minn Gas Lt Ga pf $1.50 
Cessna Airc .40et 16 .. ||IIl Zine 1.15e ..t 2 10% ! 4||Pa Edis $5 pf 52285 8 8 J g |Utan Radio 40.. 4 “1 |Minn Gas Lt 5ia% pf... $1.37 
Chi Fi Shaft.3Se 1 3 347%, 3 3 3g|Imp Tb Can h.40a 105g g Pa P&L $7 pf 7230 1075_ 108 1075, 108 + Utility Equit ..t § 3 Y% | Minn Gas Lt $5. “0 pt... .$1.27%5 
Chief Cons Nag. 1 .. ||Ind Svc 6% pf..240 52 2 5 4||Pa Wat&Pw 4..1250 54¥2 S42 S4¥q S4¥2+ al Equit pritk.225 Y%q|Minn Gas Lt 5% pf....$1.25 
Childs pf 2225 3 3 3g\\Ins Co N A 21a 8919 4||Pepperell 10 ...225144 144 144 144 ; |Mohawk Carpet M Ste 


j | Mountain Producers 
Cities Service .. 21 72 .. ||Int Hyd-Et pf 1812 q\|Phillips Pkg Yet 1 7M 7% 7% TMe— “yal VALSPAR CORPt 2 : ve .. | 
Cities Sve pf...2250 lo .. |jInt Min&Ch wart 14 91% g||Pierce-Govern let 12 173g 18% 173g 187%+ 238) vaispar pf 3k..tz20 50 13, fy Ca.) pf $180 
City&S Hom 60. 3 8 8 . |{Int Petrol hi ... 185g Yg||Pioneer Gold ...t 15 3%— 3¥e 3%6 3¥e+ Ye|lveneruel Pet ..t 4 | .. |Ohio Pow. pf $1.12% 
Claude Neon Lts. 2 Int Prod Ye ..t 814 “% ||Piper Airc Yet 7 35— 334 35% 334+ Oshkosh B’Gosh i0¢ 
Colon Develop....t 1 Int Util ? 


° 20% 3g||Pitts & LE 5..2230 6534 6534 65%_ 6534+ IW VA C&C Yet 3 Oshkosh B pf 37 Tige 
Colonial Airl ..¢ 8 Yg||Inters Pw De! pf 19 1 


@e 


94.37 ° 31.27 s - 17 INDUSTRIALS 


23 
8 


178. 9 July 14 

74 43 Ju v 15 
145 93 De 
171.37 Jan 
198.84 Jan 
202 99 Sept 13 
195.78 Nov 1 
COMBINE: > (& 
105 iJ y ‘ 





bo bd dD RIOD ND HD NIHI MH = BS SS 
2 st es es ee pe eens 


tt et et bt ee 


8 


: 
ere 
ed elt eke 


_ 
- 
' 


Asas 
S2S8282 
SESN8S5 


— 

tot 
a) 

hae 


ee 
bo 
8s. 


S&% #692 
bY 
++ 1 Ltlietitese! 


Ba 
SB 
sz 


31.06 
31.04 


ee eB ONO MH OO 


FINANCIAL NOTES 


2 
|Pettibone Mulliken 

. 3p|/Pitts Metall 3yet 4 10% 10% 10% 10%4— %4|lWest Air Lines. 24 119 2| Pitts, Bess & LE RR pf $150 
Col Fuel&Il war.t 3 Ve!) Irving Air Ch 1 87— ) Yg\\Pleas V W .20et 1 42 412 4% -+ |Wms O-O-Mat.. 2 ‘8|Remington Rand pf $1.12% 
Colts P F Arm.. 4 ; 3334— )|!tal Superpow At 1% ; ? ie Polaris Mng .20et 7 3 3 3 : «+ ||Willson Pr .80tz150 1 ig|S Texas Comm Nat Bk . $2 56 
Com P Svc 1.60t 1 26g 26Vg 26%+ V4)! Pratt & L 1.30etz50 3034 3034 ‘ /a\|Woodley Pet .40t 6 | Troy & Grnbush RR Asso $1 4 
Comp SM vic .60t 2 3 1134 .. ||JACOBS FL .. 12 10% 10g Yq \Premier Gid .03e 7 1% 1% fs -- |\Wright Harg hi. 16 31% 3 v {pues Aan ws as INDUSTRIALS (25 Stocks) 
Conn Gas & C... 3 1S. Ye ||Jeannette Gla ..f 12 5 ve (=5 Vg\|Pressed Met Yee. 3 12% 12% a U. S. Steel 7% pf $1.75 | 
Con Biscuit .40at 4 6% .. eee) 4 ee = = = - 3 —, ~— ere . aw ut 8 %e |} SSS |Untvergal Winding 1% pf. $1.75 The Guaranty Trust Company of 
Con Gas Ut .10gt 1 6 : J p 2 + 34|)|Pug Sd Ll 4 1334 e 1: 4) Wash Ry & El (B.0.) 2244c New York h been appointed 

1 u f 3 1 3 p 1 * hip or being reorgan-|Wilkes Barre Lace $1 NeW or as app 

Cons M&S hia...275 6 45\4+ PugSd P&L Spf 5.275 10534 10612 10534 112 In bankruptcy or receivership or being reorg |Woolworth (FWi&Co, Ltd am , -| trustee, registrar and paying agent 


Cons R Strs .70et 2 9 — WeiiKEN-R T&LA3g9z250 25 25 2434 2434+ 14 jjized under Bankruptcy Act, or securities assumed : en pt ; 
Cons Textile get 8 5 Svo_.. |(KingsC L pfDlgk.250 43% 43% 4309 4319+ 515||QUAKER OATS 3.280 80 81 791 79%— 1%4\|by such companies. Fully listed. Dividends in| DeP- tec for 6% P for $100,000,000 of the American 


Cont F&Mch 3ge. 6 1259+ g Kingst Pr .10et 3 3% 3% 31 Quaker Oats pf 6.230151 151 151 151 + Wol|the foregoing tabir are annual disbursements based ive- 
Cook PL&V .80.. 1250 1419— 34 Kirby Pet .10e.. 5 at 413 45 rt vg on the last quarterly or semi-annual declaration. | DIVIDEND MEETINGS TODAY | Tobacco ron ge A eames -fi 
Copp Range Vpez850 ’ 8g . Knott Corp .40e.t 11 17% 1834 1734 1734+ % RKO opt war...f 1 1% 1% 1% 1% .«. || Uniess Otherwise noted, special or extra dividends | — year 3 per cent debentures due on 
Cornuc G Min..t 1 % : %e+ Vig ||Koppers Co pf 6.t7z90 11014 11014 11014 110%4+ % a &UtIwa. 5 1 1 1 1 .+ |jare not included. xd Ex b A - “ee. Atlas Powder Oct. 15, 1969. 

Corroon & Rey..t 6 2 2 ‘6 Kresge D St pf 4tz50 951% 9515 9515 951 . aytheon Mfg .. 16 422 422 413g 41344 %%)/ la Also extra or extras ash or stoc e rder City ‘ 

Cor&Rey pf 7ioktz30 87 85\4 85\4q— a\\Krueger Brew .SSe 4 885 a, a5 ssh %|/Red Bank Oil... 7 2 2 1% 2  .. |\clared or paid so far this year? f Payable in stock. | Federal Light & Traction The Commercial Trust Company | 2 

Cosden P pf Sgk.tz50 335% 335g 335g+ 5g [Republic Av Wet 61 S%m 6Yg S%m 6 + Veg Paid last year. h Payable in Canadian funds. a NGCMANY of New Jersey has been appointed oe 
Creole Pet te.. 8 23 22% 22%—— 3g\\LACK RR NJ ..2130 52 525g 52 52% .. IRice-Stix DG ivge 2 175% im 1% 1712— 2 |k Accumulated dividends paid or declared this year.) “ODO pharmacal New Jersey transfer agent for| oc’ 
Croft Brew .05gt 13 1 1 1Vg+ VeiiLake Sh MBO. 5 15 15 1434 143g— g\\Roosevelt Fd YVagt 1 3 3 + ur Under rule. ww With warrants. xw Without) pheins Dodge Corp. stock of Foremost Dairies, Inc. Oct. 20 


Crowley Milner..? 5 95% 95g 95g+ We\iLakey F&M .20e 8 334 334 3% 334— _VallRoot Pet ...... 1 6 6% ‘Na 614+ {a\|warrants z Actual sales. 
__—_—<$___—$$$$——_—_—_—_—_—_————— ——— — ———— — —————————————— aE Howard A Plummer has been | Oct 


a eri —e 3 PUBLIC AUTHORITY BONDS made a limited partner in Pyne, | $c 


£ 


AVERAGES FOR LAST I? MONTHS 


ILROADS (25 Stocks 


© ©© O2OOwn OOOVOD OOOL vy 


bt tt ee 
bo rh dD bo hoe ee 





~ 
to 


i944 ligt 
ct 71.30 
Sept 0.9 
Aug 31 85 
July 32.72 
June 32.00 
May 0.97 
April 30.93 
March .. 31.55 
Feb 30.10 
Jan . 28.06 
5; 1943 
Dec 25.87 
Nov 27.03 1 3 
INDU ‘STR IALS 


I=} baad 


Veevuewww 





SHuissuse 
bb as aot 
~~) 

++i +++4 


amma) 
++1t+ 


— 


~~) 

















SSSSSNSSRSRE BRSSSA2Bs 


Bd dad 2) 2 


NVSVINWSATU eS eT 


1944 
Oct 
Sept 
Aug 


July 


SNYWWWCUGaA@auleun 


[+l itir¢l 


“3,000 High. Low. Last. Choe. | D O M E S T I C B O N D S yy ~— Kendall & Hollister, members of os 


$1,000.High. Low. Last. Chge. | sont OF NEW TOME 
AM G & E 334s 70 .. 1414 110 110 110 + Ta Bien. 0 Stand G & E 65 66... 16 98% 97% 97%— 4%! , Bid. Askea. | the New York Stock Exchange. Set 
Am P&L 6s 2016 ... 9 10455 10435 1043)— Sales in net || — Net ||Stand P & L 6s S7.. 12 98 977% 9T%g— Yo) 34s. wen. and refund, Aug. | ite Use| ‘The Chemical Bank and Trust| oct 
As Elec 4¥gs 53 ..... 28 93 93 93 + High. hge. || ’ Dec. * ' 9 |Company has been a inted agent k June 
ASG &E S50... Il 2M 2 Wad My RNS. Lan See || _ ERM. Low. Last. CO. liviee WAT P So 79 A 2200 10 MMG— %/oh, Cm Set Dees Eee. es a pany ppo g ees Jun 
AsG & E Ss 68 ....% 1 26% 26g 2614— M% EA ST G  & _F “'s 36 A t 16 10114 | 101% 10114 Nebr Pw 4¥s 81 27107 «107 107 = 2s, gen. and refund., Aug., °7 98 1Oc 102.34 101.85 102.12 _, 
ASG &E 4s 48 ...* 126 26 26 —1 | Elec P&L Ss 2030 8 10433 104 104354 Se |NEngG&E 5s 50 .. S 84¥Q 84g 8412+ UNIT L & RY Sigs $2 36 105% 10542 105%) .. TRIBOROUGH BRIDGE the preferred stock of the Welch 3 102.36 101.72 102.03 Feb. 
AsG & E 4tgs 49 ..* 4 263g 2614 2639+ 1% . N Eng G & E 5s 48 48% & 8 — : ‘ ‘ lus Feb.. 1980 106 106y|Grape Juice Company, at $110 a . .T or oc. ron + 34) Jan 
1 n ‘ GATIN 334s 3 ; i a G s 47 ; -AS 7 2 a0 : 2-8 Botec 102.43 . 7 ; 
As T&T Sigs SSA .... 1910014100 100 + 3% cATINEAY » py = id 8 vy Bg h- + - ~ — - it — os Ba WALDORF-AST Ss S4.1112 470g 45tq 47 + PENNSYLVANIA TURNPIKE |share plus accrued dividends. """"10352 103.02 103.24 00 | 2943 : 
dee : % u 2 cf NW ON2 , ww , ° E ; A 3 Th, 103.45 103.15 103.39 15 | stow aaa 
BELL T CAN Ss 878 1 114% 11414 114%4+ 1% . N Eng Pow 5s 48 9 1023% 10214 102354 FOREIGN BONDS bee a YRNIA TOLL SOME Ya 108% | Stephen F. Sayer has been ap-| 103 21 102.64 102.71 - 68 Nov “ ~ 
oe ee Soe eee wah in soe aS. San Francisco-Oakland 1%s. 1962 ... 101 101%4| Pointed assistant cashier in charge 103.39 10284 103.28 Ringel 
- - Ind . : 1 ‘in a F ] i ‘0- . ya 2 . $ 3.2 2 
on ‘a 4 15 ~~ rt = 18 | int Sec? 7 F x ; ey ae rt 4\|OGDEN GAS Ss 45 3 101% 101% 1011 CANIN CON is S. 1 HB 3 DELAWARE RIVER BRIDGE of sales finance development of the Holiday 1944 
m St 3 55 134 S134— %4)/ 1" — eet a ; oR dieetedin 2 a : - a . : : 03.5 103.15 103.27 Oct 
Cen St EI 5s 48 ° 1 3034 3034 5034— “ Inters Pow Ss 57..... 10 97%q 963g 97%q+ PARANA BRAZ 7s 58.. 6 40 40 40 — 1%, 2-708, Aug., 1973-46 107% 108% | First National Bank of Philadel- oo ' + = . = Sept 
hia. Oct 103.29 102.88 102.97 16 | Aus 


Cen St P&L Sts 53 st. 2100 100 100 : : z PHILA EL P Sigs 72. 2109 109 109 + | 2 26 | Hue 
Chi Ry Ss 27 ct 31 64 «63% 633%4— 1% JER CEN P&L 3igs OST 12 106% 10655 1067%—+ Potome Ed Ss 56 E 2 10514 105% 105%, RUSSIAN 6¥s 1919..810 6 6 6 oe | RAILWAY EARNINGS Smith, Barney & Co. made, yes-| = eve iano it +4 7 | Sune 
Cities Ser 5s 69 .... 7104 104 104 + 3% Pow Cor Can 4¥gs 59 B 4 102% 101% 102%2+ 1% | = : = = Oct ito «(108 '52«i103.83 5 | May 
Cities Ser Ss 66 . 2 1032 103% 10314 KAN G&E 6s 2022 A .. 1121 121 121 — §Matured bonds; negotiability impaired by ma- terday, a secondary paren” of de 103 91 103.24 103.36 - 7 —_, 
Cities Ser Ss 58 ..... 6 1035, 10342 10312 SO CAL ED 3s 65....1 11053 10534 1053%3— 1% \turity. “In bankruptcy or receivership or being} RAILWAY EXPRESS AGENCY 40,700 shares of the Babcoc a |o3 . 403 50 103 x 103.44 + _ 


Cities Ser Ss SO .... 11 1043, 104 = 1043g4+ Vp) MINN P&L 4¥q5 78 .. 5 103%4 10314 103%4+ Spalding Ss 89 ..1 10 95 95 95 + 34) reorganized under Bankruptcy Act, or securities! 1944. aun - Wilcox Company’s common stock|>*; 10263 10187 10240 Jan 
Con G Balt 419s 54 ..1 3 122% 2 1222 122Vg— 112||Minn P & L Ss SS .... 2 106V4 10614 106%4 Stand G & E 65 48 st 4 9814 984 981% .. |\assumed by such companies. tBonds so marked are] 05S. Sovenue sue Snesene tx nS a 12 ret a8 at $27.50 a share. Concession to Cet 25° .'2.:5102:49 101.99 102.21 1943 
Cont G & E Ss SBA. 6106 g 10412 104744 3% Stand G & E 6s S1.... 11 983g 98g 98%q4+ 4 fully listed. ur Under rule. ww With warrants.|s mos. revenue and inc. 257.782.952 225.018 760' dealers was 65 cents a share. pve oy err be P| es Po - a 


Cuban Tob Ss 44 .... 6 9934 9934 9934+ 5g)|NASSAU & SUF 5s 45. 1 10034 10034 10034 Stand G & E 6s 57.... 23 9814 98 98 — ‘q xw Without warrants. war Warrants. ‘Payment to carriers “96,093,378 —94,007.819 
. . 





a 


Pe ee ee tet te tt fk tt tt tt 


IIa 
eiateletetetetoleloteteieletere 


row 
Se bee bee doe, ee ee beet 


we 
220 
Pr 
OSs 








Pr iiNAIVCLAL 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


will be deposited to the credit of| 
the club with the Marine Midland) 
Trust Company of New York, in 
escrow until it is practicable to 
commence and complete construc- 
tion of a proposed horse racing 
plant at Oceanport, Monmouth 
County, N. J. 

The Monmouth Park Jockey 


' . : ~, .|Club, organized in 1941, has ac-| 
ties Corporation; Hallgarten & Co.; |quired 147 acres and has leased, or| 


Hayden, Stone & Co.; L. F. Roths-|holds options to lease, 149 adjoin-| 


tie the child & Co.; Stein Brothers & jing acres. The parcel will include} 
the property known as Elkwood| 125,000 Shares 


Boyce, Bioren & Co.; Boenning 
METROPOLITAN EDISON COMPANY 


Company; Buckley Brothers: De- Park, the site of a race track. : 
Haven & Townsend: Crouter & Bo- All the common stock except di- 

Cumulative Preferred Stock, 3.90% Series 
(Par Value $100 Per Share) 


FINANCIAL 


U. S. DEPOSITS DROP|UTILITY SECURITIES 
AT RESERVE BANKS) ON MARKET TODAY 


Decrease of $626,000,000 Is Continued From Page 30 
Reported by Federal Board Sane: 
in Weekly Statement 


MONEY 


Tuesday, Oct. 31, 1944 


Call Loans: 1 per cent 

Time Loans: 14 to 1% per cent. 

Commercial Paper: 5 to 4 of 1 
per cent. 

Turnover on Stock Exchange! gankers’ Bills: Rates of pur- 
| chase of discounts, 4@%s, 30 

Was 17,533,817 Shares, Best to 90 days: %@14, 120 days; 


for Month Since 1939 5% @%«, 150 to 180 days. 
Rediscount Rates: On advances 


to New York Federal Reserve 
member banks secured by 


Special to Tue New Yorx Tomes 
United States Government se- WASHINGTON. Oct. 31—The 
curities having a maturity or | 


call date of a year or less, % | condition statement of weekly re- 

of 1 per cent; on longer ma- porting member banks in 101 lead- 

turities, 1 per cent. ling cities, the Federal Reserve 
London Demand Loans: % of 1 | Board reported today, shows the 
per cent; short bills, 1%° per | following principal changes for the 

cent, three-month bills, 1% |W .e% ended Oct. 25: 

oo De Sar Oe An increase of $824,000,000 in 
1943. The daily turnover ex-| SILVER |demand deposits adjusted, and de- 
ceeded the million-share mark in| New York: Foreign silver, 44%c |creases of $626,000,000 in United) 
two sessions, the largest of which| per ounce; London. 23%d._| states Government deposits, and 

: . lana | $287,000,000 in deposits credited to} 


smallest full day’s business 
wus 583,450 shares it 16. same periods back to 1926 as fol-| domestic banks. 

The market ended the month|!©WSs: Commercial, industrial and agri-| 
with prices mixed. Aircrafts were|,,,, |cultural loans increased $47,000,- 
the strongest feature. Stocks | 1943 000. Loans to brokers and dealers 
pushed forward in the first half of | 154 for purchasing or carrying securi- 
the month to the best levels since | 1940 ties other than United States Gov- 
mid-July; the combined averages | isss ernment obligations increased $53,- 
at 104.20 on Oct. 19 compared with | 419,953,750 100,000 in New York City, $30,000, - 

2'729:445.400}000 in the Chicago district, and 


OCTOBER TRADING 
A 0-YEAR RECORD, 


This is under no circumstances to be construed as an offering of this Preferred Sto 
or 45 an offer to buy, or as a solicitation of an offer to buy, any of su 
Stock. The offer is made only by means of the Prospectus. 


i 
NEW ISSUE 





Trading on the New York Stock 
Exchange last month was heavier 
than in the previous month, and 
was the largest for a corresponding | 
month gince 1939. Sales for Octo- 
ber, as compiled by THE NEW YORK| 
TIMES, amounted to _ 17,533,817 
shares, compared with 15,945,982) 
shares in September, and with 13,- 
922.678 shares in the same month} 


| 
: rectors’ qualifying shares, is to be} 
dine; Graham, Parsons & Co.: 


|deposited under a voting trust! 
Granbery, Marache & Lord; Hill &| agreement. 
Co.; Janney & Co.; Jenks, Kirkland 

Co.; A. E. Masten & Co.; E. M. 
Newton & Co.; Schmidt, Poole & 
Co.; Schoelkopf, Hutton & Pom- 


eroy, Inc.; Sheridan, Bogan & Co.; 
J. W. Sparks & Co.: Harold E. 
Wood & Co. and Yarnall & Co. 





RESISTOFLEX CORP. STOCK | 


100,000 Shares of Common to Be 
Offered at $4 a Unit 











An offering of 100,000 shares of | 
$1 par value common stock of Re-| 
sistoflex Corporation will be made | 
today by Herrick, Waddell & Co.,| 
Inc. The stock will be priced at $4) 
a share. Proceeds from the sale 
will be added to working capital. 

Capitalization of the corpora- 
tion, giving effect to the present 
financing, will consist of 250,000 
shares of common stock. Resisto- 
flex, organized in 1936, is engaged 
in the chemical field of synthetic 
plastics and resins. Its principal 
product is “compar,” a synthetic | 
resin of high tensile strength. 


Price 1025 per share 


plus accrued dividends from October 1, 1944 


n 
in 





SEC Clears Way for Sale 
PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 31 (*)— 
The Securities and Exchange Com- 
jmission released jurisdiction today 
over the results of competitive 


bidding on $24,500,000 of first 
mortgage bonds and 125,000 shares 
of $100 par value cumulative pre- 
ferred stock of the Metropolitan 


The 


Ten Months Copies of the Prospectus may be obtained from the undersigned. 


2,231,307,700 
8A3 199,875 | 
926,817,350) 
. 747,880,475 
300 870,925 
719,933,500 
2.419 ,953,750 
2,419,953,750 


October 
$166,618 ,600 
208 875,600 
267 521,350 
179,106,325 
151,041,825 
170,344,800 
185,452,075 
227,291,275 
337 065.500 
275,608,200 
227,676,500 
232.922.600 
189,254,100 
353.863.350 


SMITH, BARNEY & CO. GOLDMAN, SACHS & CO 


H. M. BYLLESBY AND COMPANY 


lacerpersied 


EQUITABLE SECURITIES CORPORATION 


LEHMAN BROTHERS SPENCER TRASK & CO. 





A. G. BECKER & CO. BLAIR & CO., INC. 


Incerperated 


HALLGARTEN & CO. 


234. 
254 .663 ,200 
227 .640.850 


F. ROTHSCHILD & CO 


Will Offer Aetna Ball Stock HAYDEN, STONE & CO. & 


Bacon, Whipple & Co. and Raw- 
son Lizars & Co. will offer today 
22,825 shares Aetna Ball and| 
Securities |Roller Bearing Company's 5 per | 
cent cumulative convertible pre-| 


& BOYCE 


STEIN BROS 





JOCKEY CLUB DEBENTURES 


of 


of New November 1, 1944. 
Slated for Public Sale Today 

year ———— - 

spond 
to 1926: 


1938 
1937 
1936 
their high for the year of 105.26, |1935 
established on July 14. Prices|}$34 ‘432,909 $121.000,000 at all reporting mem-|Edison Company, Reading, Pa. 
weakened in the final week, erasing | 1932 3.341.900/ ber banks. Loans to brokers and| Amendments providing for a 103.5 
all the earlier gains, and the aver-| i930 ‘$23's0| dealers for purchasing of carrying |per cent redemption price on Series 
ages retreated to the lowest levels | 1228 2.990.350/ United States Government obliga-|/E 4 per cent first mortgage bonds 
in a month 1927 2.242.450 | tions declined $36,000,000 and other/and 103 per cent on Series G 4 per 
The decline of 0.18 point in the|*** 2,195,490 | loans ao same purpose declined|cent first mortgage bonds also} 
ombined averages f th nth $24,000,000. |were approved by the commission. | 
iteiaeh ten patentee Oi done CURB MARKET Holdings of Treasury bills de- ™ | 
date to 9.51 points : Trading in stocks and bonds on| clined $84,000,000 in New York 
The following table gives the|the New York Curb Exchange last City and increased $85,000,000 in 
total transactions in shares for Oc-|month increased slightly over the the Chicago district; at all report~| $1,600,000 
tober and the ten months of this| preceding month. The largest daily|!"& member banks the decrease - 
compared with the corre-|turnover in stocks was 323,595/ Was eden ok ahaaiaet m= gee ry PEt value Sa} 
n i of each yee shares on Oct. 23 and in bonds it|Sury certificates of indeptec , - é are. e ering consti- 
ig period of each year TS $736,000, on Oct. 19. declined $34,000,000 in the Chicago} | Bond & Goodwin, an WN pean tutes the unsubscribed portion of | 
10 be | Sales of stocks in October| district and $65,000,000 at all re-|today $1,600,000 of ten-year 6 per/an offering made by the company 
7 795.349 amounted to 5,382,600 shares, com- porting member banks. Holdings cent cumulative income debentures|of 30,375 shares to the holders of ee ee ey ge eee 
240.969 094 | : —_ J hi - . . 
a2 828 soe] Penne Ete SS ee Sones te SD: 00 000 and hold ae Ig and voting trust certificates for} !\* Bey semen oo THIS 18 UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES TO BE CONSTRUED AS AN OFFERING OF THESE SECURITIES FOR 
iis str'aeo|tember and with 4,023,410 shares +e te Oe nenes $67,000,000, |223:000 shares of 1-cent par value : : ; 
225,077 350] in the same month in 1943. Bond . om Ke hae ory in. {Common stock of the Monmouth SALE, OR AS AN OFFER TO BUY. OR AS A SOLICITATION OF AN OFFER TO BUY. ANY OF SUCH 
jo 786000 |dealings aggregated $12,355,000, _Demane we gee Pr pene the|Park Jockey Club. The securities 
i i are to be e j its 
against $11,266,000 in September) tal increase was $824,000,000, the offered in units of $1,000 


Leaves the Pennsylvania 
SECURITIES. THE OFFERING IS MADE ONLY BY MEANS OF THE PROSPECTUS 


Dr. Harvey Bartle, chief medical 


396,988,920 examiner of the Pennsylvania 


46,662,841 278,612,882 


15,661,431 
39.379,082 
29,187,659 


586,350,858 


699 916.034 


378,990,017 | 


489,362,220|for October and from Jan. 1, to- 


279.415.937| and $18,875,000 in October, 1943. 


Transactions in stocks and bonds 


ges 762,900|gether with the same period for 
712.278.847| 1943, were as follows: 


463,268,004 


Stocks (Shares) 


| principal increases were $332,000,- 
|000 in New York City and $258,- 
000,000 in the Chicago district. 
|Time deposits increased $37,000,- 
|000. United States Government de- 





}debentures and voting trust certifi- 
cates for 100 shares at $1,001 a 
unit on a when, as and if issued 
basis, and subject to the approval 
of subscribers by the New Jersey 
Racing Commission. 





Railroad, with offices in Philadel- 
phia, will retire today under the 
company’s regulations after forty- 
one years of service with it. He 
will be succeeded by Dr. John ri 
White 2d, now the road’s examiner 


METROPOLITAN EDISON COMPANY 
$24,500,000 


ate vr to Date. | POSits declined in all districts. 
$7,415,142) Deposits credited to domestic 
4,023,410  62,134.152) hanks declined $119,000,000 in New 
Bonds (Par) 355.000 $155,400,500/ York City and $287,000,000 at all 
18,875,000 196,855,000/ -enorting member banks. 
. | Borrowings of weekly reporting 
Two Promotions Announced | member cies increased $93,000,- 
responding month since 1940 Fred D. Lehn has been appointed | 999 during the week, and on Oct. 
Transactions amounted to a par/assistant secretary and assistant| 25 amounted to $283,000,000. 


value of $166.618,600 and were di-| treasurer of the Underwood-Elliott- 
INSURANCE MERGER VOTED 


vided as follows: Corporation,|Fisher Company, Philip D. Wag- 
Directors Approve Plan, Which 


$160.201.700: United States Gov-joner, president, announced yester- 
ernment, $274,400, and foreign, | day. John M. Thompson Jr. will 
Now Goes to Stockholders 


October Net proceeds from the financing 


5,852,360 


in Washington. 


1944 
1943 








Principal Assets and Liabilities of Member Banks 


WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—A summary of the principal assets 
member banks and of debits to demand deposit accounts follows 


(In Dollars) 
c———-Net Change Since——, 
Oct. 18. 1944 Oct. 27, 1943 
9,000,000 + 1,106,000,000 

127,000,000 


661,000 000 
47,000,000 241,000,000 | 


BOND MARKET 


Although bond dealings last 
month increased to the largest to- 
tal since July, the turnover for Oc- 
tober was the smallest for a cor- 


FIRST MORTGAGE BONDS. 2”%% SERIES DUE 1974 
PRICE 101%% AND ACCRUED INTEREST 


1944 
1943 


and liabilities of reporting | 





ASSETS 
Loans and investments—total 
Loans—total , Loni 
Commercial, industrial and agricultural loans... 
Loans to brokers and dealers for purchasing or 
carrying: . 

United States Government obligations.... 
Other securities eevee 
Other loans for purchasing or carrying: 

United States Government obligations.... 
Other securities ° 
Real estate loans 


: ho j.| Loans to banks 
Directors of the American Equi finer feona 


) ) r of New| Treasury bills : 
Sey Qe Seer ae Treasury certificates of indebtedness 


talra . ~| Treasury notes 
| York and the Knickerbocker Insur United States bonds 


ance Company of New York have | Obligations fully guaranteed by U. S. Gov't... 
Other securities ‘ 
voted to recommend a merger un- Reserve with Federal Reserve Banks 
as nh vau . 
der the name of the former COn-| Balances with domestic banks 


cern. The resulting company LIABILITIES 
| Demand deposits—adjusted 
\would have assets of about $17,- uae. 


Oct. 25. 1944 
54 088 000,000 4 
11,107,000 000 4 

6,183,000,000 + 


atin deh edthded ditt tddamen hd hhe hee Lite TLL LTT ty 


COPIES OF THE PROSPECTUS ARE OBTAINABLE 
FROM ANY OF THE UNDERSIGNED 


812,000,000 
805 000 000 


36,000 0007 
121,000 ,0005§ 


24,000,000) 
5,000 ,000f 


i 133,000, 
$6,169,500. The volume for the|succeed Mr. Lehn ag director of the >i MELLON SECURITIES CORPORATION 
month increased $34,407,200 over|company’s international division. 
that for September but was lower|Mr. Lehn joined the company in 
by $42 000 than in the same/1929 and has been director of the 
month a year ago linternational division since May, 

Corporation bonds continued last|1934. Mr. Thompson has been ex- 
month to advance to new record/ecutive assistant to the president 
highs but prices at the end of Octo-|of Underwood. 


ber were slightly below their best| Postoffice Makes Profit 


levels. The combined average of 
forty bonds, at 95.77, on Oct. 19) WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 (Pi — 


vas at its high since the com-|The Postoffice Department built Time deposits . 
sation was pp omen in 1913./up a surplus of $9,756,377 in the| 000,000, a capital of $1,500,000 and fooeun ee vee 
United States Government obliga-| July-September quarter of the new/a policyholders’ surplus of about Domestic banks 

were firm last month, and/fiscal year. Postmaster General) $6,000,000. 
foreign loans were mixed Walker said today that this was in| Stockholders of both companies 
Bond dealings for the month and/contrast to a deficit of $14,828,982| will pass on the proposal at meet- 


Rorrowings 
from Jan. 1 compared with the! for the same period a year ago. lings on Nov. 30. 


Condition of Reserve Member Banks in 101 Cities October 25 


inter-bank and U. 8. Gov't accounts during 
current week 
(Figures in millions of dollars; six ciphers omitted.) 
Total 
All Dis- New Phila- Cleve- Rich 
tricts. Boston. York. delphia land. mond 
$54,088 $2,852 $21,003 $2,244 $4,462 $1,764 
11,107 659 4,727 427 456 301 
6,183 401 2,492 235 400 137 


522,000,000 
335 000 000 
1,062,000 000 
65,000 000 
1,323,000,000 
2,202,000,000 
10.3770.000 000 
7,289,000 000 
19,627,000 000 
604,000,000 
2.889 000.000 
9.565 ,000.000 
586 000 000 
2,101,000 000 


24 


121,000,000 
70,000,000 
6,000,000 
90,000 000 
~ 2,424,000,000 
1.098 000 000 
2,350,000 000 
1,976,000 000 

- 1.233.000.0000 
2,000,000 
1,173,000 000 
27,000,000 
164,000,000 | 


THE First BOSTON CORPORATION BLYTH & Co., INC. KIDDER, Peasopy & Co. 


10,000,000 
4,000,000 
67,000,000 
65.000 ,000 
38,000 000 
67,000,000 
2,000 000 
13,000,000 
153,000,000 
5,000,000 
95,000 000 


nT 


avi, 


LAZARD FrERES & CO. UNION SECURITIES CORPORATION WHITE, WELD & Co. 


E. H. ROLLINS & SONs EASTMAN, DILLON & Co. 


INCORPORATE 


Harris, Hart & COMPANY 


(INCORPORATED) 


SALOMON Bros. & HUTZLER 


F. S. MoseELey & Co. 
5,621 000,000 
1,568 000 000 
6,342,000,000 


37,438,000 000 
eee 7,514,000 000 
6,397 000,000 


8,919,000,000 251,000,000 | 
876,000,000 95.000 000 | 

; 283,000,000 y 246,000 000 
except 





PPP Pee eee, 


SHIELDs & COMPANY TUCKER, ANTHONY & Co. 





| 
: 
© 
: 
: 
: 
PITTSBURGH, NOVEMBER 1, 1944 


f Peyvesunons LL Le ek kk kek heh Rekete Rebebek cde debeebaebadedhdechabededtadteddedcdeddieedadtdhedadddddadadRaddcaddaddtadedddedetadaatiatdadahadtatdta atl adetaadataiel 


Lb dt ddd bhi heheh thet taht ete eek it? TT tit tT 


tions 


13,008 000,000 


GES 


SAN FRAN. 


(Continued) 


Thie announcement appears as a matter of record only and is under no circumstances to be construed as an offering of these sacuruses for 
sale, or as an offer to buy, or as a solicitation of an offer to buy, any af such securities, 
The offering is made only by the Prospectus 


OUT-OF-TOWN EXCHAN 
CHICAGO | CHICAGO | § 


(Continued) 
Close. | Sales. 


Sales Close | 
1,400 Gen Financ 5% 50 Rath Pack. 41%| 400 Natomas a | 
100 Gen Foods . 41 | 3.200 Signo su of gav2| 100N Am Ofl.. 17% 
300 Gen Motors 61%) 00 @inclair Oil. 13%| ,100 Pac AmFish 14% 
“30 Goody Ta 50Spiegel Inc. 10%| “200 Pac G & E. 33% 
100 Gti “yg Dredg : 200 Std Oil Ind. 33 20 Pac Ligh pf.107% 
100 Heilem Gre i 50 Stew Warn. 15% 100 PacP Ser pf 20% 
50 Houd Her B 50 Strkline Fu 11%) 10 Pac T & T.121 
s56 tr eee 450 Studebak C. 18%| 50 PignWhis pf 12%| 
109 Int Harvest 50 Sundstr MT 14% 100 Soundv Pip. 20 
150 Kell Switch 200 Swift & Co. 30% 800 Sou Pacific. 30% 
150 Kimber! Ci 36 100 Texas Co 47 700 Std Oll Cal. 36% 
900 Kimb cf rte 200 Union Carb 79%! 100 TideWat Ol! 15% 
100 I ‘aSalle Ext 150 Wisc Bkshrs 11% 600 Transameric 9% 
po , Sales, 26,000 shares 100 Un Ol! Cal 
900 Univers Oil 


200 Leath & Co 

600 Lib McN&L. TY St MEET 200 Vict Equi 

200 Lincoln Prt SNe pt ’ equip 

150 Marah Field 18 SAN FRAN. a o4 YaCaban 4. 

50 Marti(GLiCo 20% 400 Aircraft Acc 6% . - 7 

50 McWi) Dred 10%! 100 CalambaSug 8% Unlisted 

150 Mid W Cor 700 Calay Cem. 2.10 200 At Top&SFe 

600 Miller&H ct 30 Calif Ink 38 100 Blair & Co 
700 Creame AM 11%/ 100 Ches & Oh 
700 Di Glorgto | 80 Domingz Oil 





CHICAGO 


Sales Close | 
100 Acme Steel. 55 
1,000 Adve Alum. 8 
100 Allied Lab.. 16% 
50 Anaconda 27 | 
100 Armour &C 5%! 
100 Asbestos Mf 1%! 
100 Aviat Corp. 4%) 
50 Bastian Ble 26% 
150 Belden Mfg. 17% 
100 Bendix Av . 45 | 
150 Beth Steel.. 64 | 
100 Borg Warn. 38%) 
100 Butler Bros 12 | 
50 Celll PS pf.1014% 
100 Cen&SW Ut %) 
SOCSt P&L pf 9% 
2,200 Chi Corp 1% 
150 Chi Corp pf 53 
100 Chi & iw 27% 
50 Cit Service 
,650 Comwl Edis 
400 Con Biscuit. 6% 
200 Cont Corp 28Y, 
90 CudPack pf.101, 
200 Cunn D Str 25% 
000 Curt Wright 6%¢| 
100 Dodge Mfg. 15 
550 Dom Ind A. 5 
200 Elgin Nt W. 34% 
100 Fairbks Mor 41 
100 Fanst! Met. 36% 
100 Fox(P) Brw 25 
200 Gen Candy. 1544| #0 Quak Oats 
3,009 200 Gen Elec BRM 50 Rad Co Am 10%! 


1,597 —— — - 
569 ae ba al 
McGinnis to Discuss Rails 

Patrick B. McGinnis of Pflug- 
felder, Bampton & Rust will speak 
on “Receivership and Reorganiza- 
tion Rails’ before the Association 
of Customers’ Brokers in the gov- 
ernors’ room of the New York 
Stock Exchange at 3:45 o'clock to- 
day. 


San 

SAS Fran- 
City las cisco 
1,880 $1,549 $5,505 
339 347 996 
216 242 502 


Min 
neap- 


st Kan Dal- Sales 

outs ol 

1,699 $1,052 $ 
421 198 
243 113 


At Chi 
lanta cago. I 
$1,719 $8,359 § 

312 1,524 
183 1,019 


ASSETS 
Loans and 
Loans—total 
Com’'|, industr’l, agricultural loans 
Loans brokers and dealers for 

purchasing or carrying 

U. S. Government obligations 

Other securities — 
Other loans for purchasing or car- 

rying 

U. S. Government obligations 

Other securities , 
Real est loans 
Loans banks 
Other loans 
Treasury bills 
certificates of 


notes 


investments—tota! 


Monmouth Park Jockey Club 


(a New Jersey Corporation) 


14} 


49 
30) 


71 


55 
34 


26 
25 


657 
578 


812 


805 
$1,600,000 


Ten Year 6% Cumulative Income Debentures 
(Registered) 


28 
32 
295 


73 
50 
131 


65 
15 
164 


8 
16 

64 

7 

112 
140 571 
624 3,776 
271 2,975 
1,0% 7,720 
15 179 

87 1,055 
447 3,784 


227 
158 
150 

56 
409 


522 
335 
1,062 
65 
1,323 
2,202 
10,370 
7,289 
19,627 
604 
2,889 
9,565 
586 
2,101 
1,241 





Dated October 1, 1944 Due October 1, 1954 


95 
377 
006 
519 792 
,T44 ( ¢ = 
fo 338 
755 859 
60 128 76 45 
110 107 104 249 
57 325 5: 74 468 


123 
212 


848 


12% 


zany 213.000 Shares 


Common Stock (Voting Trust Certificates) 
(One Cent Par Value) 


Treas indebtedness 
Treasury 
United States bonds ‘ 
Obligat’ns fully guar. by U.S.Gov 
Other securities ° 
Reserve with Fed. Reserve Banks 
Cash in vault 
Balances with domestic 
Other assets—net 
LIABILITIES 
Demand deposits—adjusted 
Time deposits 
U. S. Government deposits 
Interbank deposits: 
Domes banks 
Foreign banks . 
Borrowings 
Other liabilities 
Capital account ee 
Debits to demand deposit acc’'nts, 
except interbank and U. S. Govt. 
accounts during current week... 


50 MusMo spA 26 
100 Nash Keiv 
300 NY Cen RR 
100 No Am Cat 
SONW Ut?“ pt : 
100 Peab Coal B 
) Peabd Ci pf 
50 PennEiSw A 2 
50 Press StiCar 
100 Pure Ot) 


200 Gen Electric 3 
100 Hobbs Bat B 
000 MJIM&MCon 
500 MtnCityCop 

50 Riv Cement 
100 8 C Edison 
500 Utah-Ida Su 
300 Westat Pete 28 
200 Westat P pf 3% 
Sales, 17,569 shares 


320 Di Giorg pf 
100 Farnsworth 
100 Gen Motors 
100 HawallaPine 2 
200 Honolul Ol 
100 Hunt Bro ‘1 
100 Lib McNeill 
400 LockheedAlir 22 
100 Magnavox Bly | 
1,000 Menase Mf.1.60 


These securities are offered as a speculation, in Units of $1,000 Debentures 

and Voting Trust Certificates for 100 shares, when, as, and if issued, and 

subject to approval of subscribers by the New Jersey Racing Commission 
and certain other conditions explained in the Prospectus. 





banks 3 





15,063 
1,437 
2,698 


2,152 
326 
426 


37,438 
7,514 
6,397 


501 
2 


456 


” 
~ 


297 2 
16 
6 
34 
269 


,839 
794 
232 
382 

1,902 


8,919 
876 
283 

1,651 

4,503 


tic 








CONSTRUCTION 
Ford, Bacon & Davis 


Enaineers 


“) Price Per Unit $1001 
1,012 
452 


7 
110 


13,008 5,533 360 1,030 


a Copies of the Prospectus may be obtained from the undersigned. 





STOCK EXCHANGE BID AND ASKED QUOTATIONS 


Bid. Asked. 
14% 177 














"BARROW, WADE, GUTHRIE & CO. 
Certified Public Accountants 


Announce that the following Certified Public Accountants 
have been admitted to Partnership in the Firm: 


MR. JOSEPH McELROY 
MR. GEORGE D. BOONE REDEMPTION NOTICE 
MR. WAYMON G. PEAVY 


BonD & GOODWIN 


INCORPORATED 


Bid Asked. 
112% 113 


losin uotations for issues not traded Bid. Asked 
c &4 ui sf ° Grant (W T) 38 39 Murphy pf 
24 24% | Nabco Liquid 


in on the Stock Exchange yesterday: Grant (WT) of . % 
157 | Nat Bond & Shr. 19% 20% 


- Gt West Sug pf 
STOCKS 59 | Nat Dept Stra pf 11% 12 


Bid oa Bid. asked Green Bay & W. 54 

id. Aske 1 5 Greyhound pf 11 1l4*| Nat Enam&Stpg 4%, 35 
110 110% 85 87 |Guantan Sug pf..160 164 | Nat Gypsum pf..101%. 101% 
60 lll‘, 19% | Nat Linen Sv 17% 18 


Hall (W F) Print 19 
> Hamil Wat pf....107% 108 |) Gi prod 32%, 34 
eo . _ 4 Harb-Walker pf. .150 | Nat Sup ‘~ pf 90% 92 
& Susq 160 163 542) Hat Corp Am A.. 7% 7% Noni Corp 15% 16 
- ist 16 Hat Corp Am pf 106% | Newberry (JJ) 66 68 
neime (% W) 70% | NwptNews Sh pf.107 112 
Helme (G W) pf.164 NYC Omnibus 26% 26% 
Hersh Ch_ cv pf..119 IN Y Dock 14% 16% 
Hinde & Dau Pap 23% NY & Hariem 162 
Hires (C E). . 22% NY Lack & W 77 78 
Hollander & Son. Northern Central.105 107 


| snerp & Doh pf 
Sheaffer Pen 
Sloss-Shef Stl 

| Sloss-Sh Stl pf 
| So P R Sug pf 
Spear & Co 
Spear & Co pf 
| Spencer Kell 
Spicer Mfg 
Square D Co pf 
Squibb & Sons 
|}Squibb & S pf 
Squibb&S 4% pf 
Stand Brands pf 
| Sterling Drug 
Sun Oll pf A 
Sunshine Mng 
Sup Oil Cal 


63 Wall Street New York 5, N. Y. 


“cco 
lev El 
& Pitt 


c & 
( 
( 
Clev & Pitt spl 
rf 
4 


St L pf 


lil pf October 


110 31, 1944 
93% 
53% 

1000 
105 105% 
115 117 
18% 18% 
31% 31% 
81 82 
46% 47% 


traus Niel 


lev 





Alb 
Alleg & 
Allied 
Amal Leather pf 
Am Bank Note 
1 Ch & Chi pf 
1 Chicle 
Export L 
-Hawaii SS 








~oca-Cola Int 
olgate-P-P pf 
Collins & A pf 
2;/Col & South 
2\Colum Br’cast 
Col G&E 5% 
*\Colum Pict pf 








FINANCIAL ADVERTISEMENT FINANCIAL ADVERTISEMENT 


ae —— 





107 
177 


B 
pt 


2 Hi & L pf Coml 
n Ice pf 7 7 C 


Consol 
Cont 


Dayton 


Atlas Tack 
Barker Bros 
Beat Cream pf 
Beech Creek 


Detroit 


Bon Ami A 
Bond Strs pf 
Boston & Maine.. 
Briggs & Strat 
Bristol-Myers 
Brown Shoe 
Bucy-Erie pf 
Budd Wheel é >» § 
Bulova Watch 38% 39 
irling Mills pf..108% 111 
Terminal be 
74 
312 
14% 


Foster 


Galr 


32 | Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 
Gen 


ip Ac pf 
Carriers & Gen 
Celanese ist pf 
Cent Foundry 
Cent Ill Lt pf 
Chain Belt 
Champ Pap & F 
Champ P & F pf.1134% 114 
Checker Cab 40% 4114 
Chi Pneu T cv pf 47 481, 
Chi eu T pr pf 56 56%, 
cr Cab 15% 15% 
City Ice & Fuel 
City Ir pf 
City St 
Clark Equip 
Clev CC & St 


vest 
es 


451, 455 
L.155 185 


Colum Carbon 
Cred 

onsol Cigar 
Con Cigar pf 
Coal 
Bak pf 
Cooper-Bess pf 
Cop’weld Stl pf 
Crane Co pf 

Crown Cork pf 
Crucible Stl 
Cuban-Am 
Cuneo Press pf 

Curtis Pub pr pf 
Cushman's 7° 
Davega Strs 
P&I 
Decca Records 
Deere & Co pf 
Deisel-Wem-Gil 


Devoe & Ray A 
Diam Match pf 
Dist Corp-S pf 
Dixie Cup A 
Dow Chem 
Dom Chem pf 
Duplan Corp 
0% |East Kodak pf 
Edis Bros Strs .. 
El Paso Nat Gas 
Endicott-John , 
Endicott-John pf.105% 106% 
5%s|Eng P S $5 pf 
jEng P S $5% pf.102 
Erie & Pitt 
Fed Lt & Trac pf.103% 105 
Fed Mogul ° 
Fliintkote pf 
Florsheim Shoe A 29% 
Follansbee St! 
Wh 
Gabriel Co 
Robert) 
Gardner-Denver 
Gardner-Denv 
Gaylord Cont 
Am Inv 
Baking pf 
Cigar 
Foods pf 
G&El cv pf 
Mills 
Mills 5% 
Out Adv A 
Prec Eq 
Prt Ink pf. .106 
Ry Sign’! pf.122 
Time Inst 
Time In pf..111 
T & R pf 
Gillette Saf R pf 86% 87% 
Glidden Co 
Goebel Brew 
Grand Union 


ay - pea pf 
0 mt Houd-Hershey A.. 
10m = Household Fin.... 69% 
97% | Houston L & P.. 6645 
50 5] |Hudson & Manpf 8% 
107% 110 Idaho Power...... 30% 
444, 45 |Inger-Rand pf....162% 
471g 48%, | Int Salt seese 44% 
108 109 |imt Shoe ........ 42% 
48 49% Int Silver .. 84% 
80 80% Int Silver pf 120 
142 150 Int T & T for ct. 16% 
106 108 | imterst Dept Strs. 17% 
52% 5414 Intertype Corp 17% 
25 97 7 | Island Crk Coal... 39 
© pitzS 127 | Island C Coal pi.142% 
pi...22) 25 | Joliet & Chi é 
pf..111% 113 | Kalam Stove & F 19% 

37 38. | Kan C Pow pf B.120 
35, 35%) Kan City Sou pf. 30 
20% 21 |Kaufmann Dept.. 17% 
61% 63% | Kayser (J) .....+.: 
372 3842 | Kendall Co pf 
40% 41 | Kresge Dept Strs. 
103. 104%4| Kress (S_H)... 
4644 47% |Kroger Grocery... 3 
125% 126 |Laclede Gas. a 
1114113 | Lambert Co 
1 16% |}Lane Bryant 
Lehigh Port C... 28% 29 
Lehigh P C pf...124% 125% 
Lehn & Fink.... 20% 204% 
Life Savers....... 46 474 
Liggett & Myers. 76 78 
Liggett d& My pf.180 181% 
Lily Tulip........ 3 31 
Lion Oil Ref..... 18% 18% 
Louisy G & E A. 22% 33% 
MacAnd & F pf.140 149% 
Macy pf 106%, 107 
Mad Sq Gar - 18 19 
Mahoning Coal 350 6450 
Maracaibo O Expl 3% 3% 
|Master Elec 254% 26% 
Maytag Co 1 pf..110 
Maytag Co pf 39 
McCrory Stores 


91%, 92% 
pt 
97 


pt 


pf 
S pf 





Hills 








103% 105 
103 
8414 88 
22 
108% 
3014 
6% 
23% 


21% 
108 


6% p 
40 
194, | 
McCror St pf ww.1ll 112%.) 
McGraw Hill 18% 18% 
McIntyre Porc 515, 524 
McQuay Norris 17 17> 
Mead Corp pf.. 99 100 
Mead pf B ww... 8944 90 
Merch & Min Tr. 32% 35 
Mid-Cont Pet ... 2433 24% 
Midid Sti Prod .. 35 ~ 3548 
Minn-Honey pfB.109 
Minn-Honey pf C.110% 113 
Minn-Honey pf D.10742 110 
Minn-Moline pf .108 110 
Minn & St L Ry. 50 5244 
Monarch Mch T.. 22% 23%} 
Monsanto Chem . 85 86 
22% 23% | Monsanto Ch pfB.117 120 


- 3 
«+ 17% 18% 


pf 
pf 194 
pf 
pf 


pf 


125 
27% 28 
111% 
103% 








103 


Morrell (J) & Co 38 


Nor Sta Pow pf 
Norwalk Tire&R . 
Norw Tire&R pf. 49% 
Norwich 
Otis Elevator pf 
Outboard M 
Outlet Co 
Pac Coast 1 pf 40% 
Pac Fin Corp Cal 15% 
Pac Lighting . . 
Pac Tel&Tel pf 
Tin Cons 
Pac West Oil 
Pan Am Petrol 
Paraffine } 
Paraffine Cos pf.1064, 
Parker Rust-Pr 
Penick & Ford 
PennCoal & Coke 13% 
Penn-Dix Ce pf A 55 
Penn G! Sand pf.111 
Peoples Drug .. 
Peoples Gas L&C 68 
Peoria & East . 
Pere Marq pf 
Milk 

Pet Milk 2d pf 
Petrol Corp 
Phila Co $6 pf 
Phila El pf 
Philip Morris pf 
Phillips-Jones 
Phill-Jones pf 
Pills Mills pf 
CC & SL.. 
Forgings 

Ft Wayne 
Way 
Ser & Bolt 
Steel pf B.. 
Yng&Ash pf.173% 
ton Co 
Pittston pf B 
| Press Stl Car ipf 15% 
S El&aG 


Pac 


Pet 


Pitt 
Pitt 
Pitt 
Pitt 
Pitt 
Pitt 
Pitt 
Pitts 


} Pub 
Pure Ol 
oll 
Sta Oil 


| Pure 
|} Quaker 
Radio pf 

Reading 1 
Reading : 
| Real Silk Hosiery 114. 
| Real Silk Hos pf.132 

Reliable Stores 
Reliance } 


Reynolds Tob 
Ritter Co 

Royal Type 
Schenley Dist pf 
Scott Paper 
Monsanto Ch pfC.108% 109% | Scott Pap $4 pf...108 
3844! Seagrave Corp .., 


Ft 


112% 113 
6% 6% 

50% 

13% 


44% 
75 


Sutherland Pap 


Thatch Mfg cv pf 54% 56 
The Fair pf 115% 117 
The Fair 6 pf . BAY 
Thermoid Co pf.. 48 
Thompson (JR) 12% 
Thompson-St pf.. 27% 
Tide Wat A O pf.108% 
Transue & Will.. 16% 
Truax-Traer C 10% 10% 
Union El Mo pf..117 118% 
Un El Mo 4% pf..112% 1144 
} Union Tank Car., 27% 28 
Un Air Lines pf. .117% 119% | 
United Biscuit 22% 23 
United Bisc pf 112 
584,| Unit-Carr Fast 26%, 27% 
1444/ United Paperbd 6% 7, 
5544 | U S Gypsum pf. .178% 180 
U S Hoff M pf... 50% 51 
2444/U S Lea pr pf....111% 112% 
6844/ U S Lines pf -§ 9S % 
14 |U S Play Cd...... 46% 48 
48% |U S Plywood 43% 44% 
274| United Stores pf..10144 101% 
% bn ~ > 4 5 
niv Lab pf......36 37% 
3 106 Univ Leaf Tob pf.173 % 
2 1192 | van Raalte 1 pf..117 117% 
133 15 Vick Chem --. 47% 49 
107" agg wy Aa" 76% 82 
a. 105 va Ifon C & C pf 4414 45 
i. ts i Virginian Ry g ae 
“14% 14% Vulcan Detin 
Vulcan Detin pf 
192 
A 


12% 

153 

& M 41% 
73 


Pharm 


44 
16% 
44% 45% 
158%, 
6% 
15% 
13% 
58 


Cos 56% 





21% 
57% 


22% 


2445 


13% 
46 
= 


106 
‘10345 


169 Waldorf Sys 1% 12 
Walgreen pf 10448 104% 
Walker(H)G&Wpf 19 19% 
Ward Baking A q Ws 
Ward Baking pf. 53 M4 
Warren Fdy & P. 30% 
Wash Gas Lt 25 
Waukesha Motor.. 19% 
Wayne Pump 294 
Wesson O&S pf.. 80 81% 
W Penn El 6% pf. 99 100 
W Penn Pow pf. .117\% 117% 
W Va Pulp & P.. 23 2344 
iW Va P&P pf 106% 108 
West Md 2 pf 10% 12 
4G West E & M pf..139 140 
%| Weston E) Inst 3334 
Westvaco Chlor.., 29% 30% 
West Chl 4% pf. .105% 106 
West Chi pf . 10845 109% 
Wheel & L Erie.. 64% 70 
Wh & L Erie pf..104 104% 
White S M pr pf. 29 30% 
Wilson-Jones 12% 13% 
Wise El Pow pf. .124% 
Woodward Iron 20% 21 
Wright Aero . 80% 82% 
Wrigley (W) Jr.. 73 73% 


187% 
5% 


RAL 


pf 


12% 
76k 
sit 251, 
19° 


1154 
30 


113% 
1064 


15% 
79 


pf . 37 
2 pf 32 


pf 
6° pf 
5 pf 


1614 





107% 108% 


pf 113 
109 
6 


5% 


of our Dallas office 


MR. IRVING 


of our Bos 


MR. WILLIAM N. HINDS 


of our Detroit office 


MR. JAMES J. 


MR. SAMUEL 
of our Philad 





* MEETING NOTICE 
THIRD AVENUE TRANSIT CORPORATION 


NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING 
New York, N. Y., October 2, 1944 

To the Stockholders of Third Avenue Transit 
Corporation and Owners of the Adjustment 
Mortgage Bonds of Third Avenue Railway 
Company Entitled to Vote at Stockholders’ | 
Meetings: 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the An- 
nual Meeting of the Stockholders of Third 
Avenue Transit Corporation will be held at 
the office of the corporation, No. 2396 Third 
Avenue, corner of 130th Street, in the Bor- 
ough of.-Manhattan, City of New York, on 
Wednesday, November 8, 1944, at i2 o'clock 
noon, for the following purposes, viz 
1. To elect thirteen directors for 
suing year; 

2. To elect two Inspectors of Llection to 
serve at the next succeeding annual meeting 
3. To transact all such other business as 
may properly come before the meeting 
Pursuant to law and the By-Laws, only 
such stockholders shall be entitled to vote 
in person or by proxy at said meeting as 
appear as stockholders upon the transfer 
books of the corporation for at ieast ten 
days immediately preceding said meeting As 
provided in the Agreement of Merger and 
Consolidation under which Third Avenue 
Transit Corporation was formed, all registered 
owners of Adjustment Mortgage Bonds of 
Third Avenue Railway Company and all per- 
sons in whose name such Bonds are registered 
only for voting purposes shall have the right 
to vote in person or by proxy at such’ meeting. 

By Order of the Board of Directors 

VICTOR McQUISTION, Secretary. | 


the en- 








J. ANGELL 


ton office 





To the Holders of 


PENNSYLVANIA GLASS SAND 
CORPORATION | 


First Mortgage 3'4% Sinking Fund 
Bonds, Maturing June 1, 1960 


| Notice is hereby given that pursuant to the pro- 


DOUGHERTY 
H. LAVERTY 
elphia office 


UNITED DRUG COMPANY 


43 Leon Street 
Boston 15, Massachusetts 


NOTICE TO ALL SECURITY HOLDERS 


United Drug Company, pursuant to 
the provisions of Section 11 (a) of the 


FINANCIAL NOTICE | 


Securities Act of 1933, as 
has made generally available to all 
its Security Holders a Consolidated 
Earnings Statement for the 12 months 
ended August 31, 1944, such period 
commencing after the effective date 
of the Company's Registration State 
ment for $20,000,000 principal amount | 
of Fifteen Year 34% Sinking Fund | 
Debentures due August 1, 1958 and} 
100,000 shares of $4.75 Cumulative 
Preferred Stock which was filed on 
July 16, 1943 with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission and which be- 
came effective on August 4, 1943. 
Upon request to the Company at the 
above address, copies of such Con- 
solidated Earnings Statement will be 
mailed to any of the Company’s Secu- 
rity Holders and other interested 
parties, 


UNITED DRUG COMPANY 
By Irving W. Smead 


Vice President and Treasurer 
October 30, 1944. 


amended, 





visions of the First Mortgage of the Pennsylvanta 
Glass Sand Corporation, dated June 1, 1940, 
the following bonds issued under and secured 
by said Mortgage, bearing the following distinc 
tive numbers: 
965 
1005 
1087 
1042 
1045 
1100 
1136 
1174 
1183 
1201 
1258 
1280 
1320 
1379 
1429 
1453 
1497 
1508 


1593 
1746 
1768 
1802 
1814 
1842 
1852 
1875 
1886 
1984 
1998 


3056 
3098 
3179 


it 


514 
540 
653 
778 
854 
865 
914 


3449 
3458 
3455 
3469 
3514 
3562 


2140 
2182 
953 1515 2311 3032 3620 
963 1517 2322 3048 3699 


for $1,000. each have been called for redemption 


2983 
3030 


| through the exercise of the optional provisions of 


the Sinking Fund, and will be due and payable 
December |, 1944 at 103% of the principal amount 
thereof and accrued interest at any of the follow- 
ing offices of Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. 
1531 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
59 Wall Street, New York City, N. Y 
10 Post Office Square, Boston, Mass. 
After said date, all interest on said bonds will 
cease to accrue. 
NOTICE—Bonds numbers 2304, 2693 and 3677 
called June 1, 1944 have not as vet been pre 
sented for payment. 


BROWN BROTHERS HARRIMAN & CO. 
Fiscal Agent 


| Nowember 1. 1944 


LS SY 
s 


Virginia Electric and Power 
Company 


Invitation for Bids 


Virginia Electric and Power Company will receive unt 
A. M., Eastern War Time, on December 1, 1944, at the Com 
office, Seventh and Franklin Sereets, Richmond 9, Virginia, 
bids for the purchase of 
1. 
tion properties and business im the City of Ric 
Virginia, and environs, 


and for the purchase of 


the Company's urban street railway and motor bus transporta- 
tion properties and business in the Cities of Norfolk and 
South Norfolk, Virginia, and environs. 


+ 
-- 


Copies of the statement of Terms and Conditions to which bids 
will be subject may be obtained either at the above office of the 
Company or at the office of Engineers Public Service Company, In 
Sth Floor, 90 Broad Street, New York 4, New York, and cop 
of other relevant documents referred to therein may be obtained 
inspected as indicated therein at the aforesaid ofhce of the Company 
or at the aforesaid office of Engineers Public Service Company, | 


VIRGINIA ELECTRIC AND POWER COMPANY 
By J. G. HOLTZCLAW, Presidons. 


es 


or 


anc 


Dated November 1, 1944. 





LOST OR STOLEN SECURITIES 


LOST—1 Certific Jacobs Aircra®® 





Certificate 





* 


— 


34 


CORN DOMINATES [st 


TRADING IN GRAINS 


Futures Decline Sharply as 
Selling Follows Weakness 
in Cash Delivery 


Special to Tue New Yorx Times 

CHICAGO, Oct. 31—Corn domi- 
nated other grains today on the! 
Board of Trade. Although bids for 
eash corn for deferred shipment 
from the country were lowered 1 
cent a bushel today, country deal- 
ers continued to sell the cash 
article at prices from 4 to 5% 
cents under the permissible limit 
in Kansas City. Purchases aggre- 
gated 225,000 bushels. 

The continued weakness in cash 
corn led to general selling of 
futures on the Board of Trade and 
the latter closed with losses of 1% 
to 1% cents 
sition to rally, although shipping 
sales of 110,000 bushels to the East 
were reported 

Cash corn 
more than a week and 
been accelerated in the last two 
days with a recession of 2 cents or} 
more. Despite this, purchases from | 
the country have exceeded 400,000} 
bushels. Elevator interests and in-| 
dustries are not inclined to pur- 
chase more corn than can be 
unloaded promptly as demurrage 
charges at the end of the fourth 
day after expiration of free time} 
amount to 2% cents a bushel. So! 
far no congestion has developed. 

Primary receipts of corn today| 
aggregated 1,089,000 bushels, com-| 
pared with 464,000 a week ago} 
and 1,281,000 last year. Shipments 
were 520,000 bushels, against 280,-| 
000 last week and 402,000 last) 
year. 

Trading in wheat was light and 
mainly professional. Prices held 
within narrow limits. A little short- 
covering caused a rally in Decem- 
ber late in the session. The latter 
closed %4 cent higher than yester- 
day, while the deferred months lost 

4 to 5 cent. 

Receipts at primary markets of 
2,120,000 bushels compared with 
2,065,000 last week and 
last year. Shipments were 2,467,- 
000 bushels, against 1,478,000 a 
week ago and 2,093,000 a year ago. 

Rye futures lost 14 to 1 cent net 
after December had been up 
around 7% cent on buying attributed | 
a cash house. Oats lost % to 1/| 
cent and barley 1 to 114 cent. 
after December had been around 
“» cent on buying attributed to a| 
eash house. Oats lost % to 1 cent 
and barley 1 to 14 cent. 

Prices for the princi 
were as follows: 

Chicago 
WHEAT 


declining 
this has 


has been 


9 


~ 


| 
pal grains| 


Prev. Last | 

1. Low. Close. Close. Year. | 
4 1.63141.64 1.63% 1.56% | 
1.59% 1.593, 1.5544 | 

1.46% 1.47% 1.52% j 


6 1 
Ye 1.45% 1.454, 


pen 
6. 


en 
3% 
o% 


3 
91 


24 
41 
06% 1 05% 
OATS 
65%, 
61 
56 
RYE 
11% 1.12% 1.10% 1 
08% 1.09% 1.074, 
04), 1.044, 1.03 
02%, 1.02% 1.01% 
BARLEY 
04%, 1.04% 1.04% 
95 95% .94 


1 
1 
41 


09%, 
06a, 
+1 054 
644 

fO\~4 7 
554, 71 
137 
14 
12%, 


Minneapolis 
WHEAT 
1.5544 1.5545 
1.52% 1.52 
FLAXSEED 
Dec., May, 3.1 
Winnipeg 
OATS 


Dec 


48%, 
484 


rices 


rices. Oct May, b513, 
RY 4 

1.07% 1.07% 1.06% 1.07% 1.07% 

1.06% 1.0714 1.05% 1.05% 1.06% 1 

1.06 1.06% 1.04% 1.0544 1.05% 1 
BARLEY 

Oct Dec 

Kansas City 
WHEAT 

1.5544 1.55% 1.55% 1.554% 1.56 

1.51% 1.52 1.515 1.51% 1.517 

1.394140 1.39% 1.39% ° 


12% 
13 
prices 


May, b64%\c 


51% | 
50 


1 
1 


Te 1.05% 1.051 


2 1.0744 
034, 1.01% 1.02 


1.03% 
| 
Dec 
May 53 
Cash prices follow: 
Chicago—-Corn, No. 3 yellow,}| 
$1.14@1.141,; No. 4 yellow, $1.05%4 
@$1.13%,. 
Minneapolis—Wheat, No. 1 dark 


There was no dispo-|’ 


23 
2,453,000 | : 





COMMODITIES 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBE 





The following table gives the amount of dealings in the stocks 


weekly transactions: 


-—Stocks in Averages 
25 25 é 


25 
Rails 
32,800 
31,080 
46,560 
59 660 
30,820 
41,050 


241,950 
32,410 
34,510 
45,960 


1 


Industrials Stn 


37,900 
35.380 
5,620 
45,240 
29.200 
14,800 


3 


98,140 


Exchange closed—( 
26,77 22,211 


Five days 150,090 
040 
\,760 
170 

17 830 
3,220 
5,500 


14 
17 
18 


19 


20 


5 
630 
2,740 
32,310 
45,190 
7,620 
110 
600 


on0 
RRO 


Week 1 
cd) 
1 
Two days 5.940 
941 
Rit 


100 
430 


Month 7 
October, 1943 
LARGEST 
Saturday 
May 3 
1930 


4,367,530 


RECORD OF 
Day 

Oct. 29 

1929 


Shares 16,410,030 


The 


7. 


45,300 
21,010 

8,260 
56,580 
44,110 
35,480 
22,940 
40,840 
35,030 

7,700 


86.100 
27,200 
29.900 
57,100 


21,100 


652,709 


VOLUME OF 
Week 


Ne 


OCTOBER 


0 
ks 
70 
#4 
Fd 
104 
60 


>, 850 


440 


385,100 


92,740 
0 
50 
86.030 
72.450 
25,810 


108 


440.70 
ya 
780 


67 


123.040 


1,462,200 
1,519,130 


1929 


*43,499,540 
*Three and one-half days of trading 


090 


STOCK 


141,668,410 


TApp! 


1944 


700 
440 
180 
900 
oon 


53,130 
»5 380 


384,980 


52,700 
60,990 
72,550 


2,688,025 


30,340 
607 840 
810.1 
742,810 
675,30) 


334,890 


3,110 
2 950 
OR ( 


‘ 
10 8 
a5 890 
49,310 
21.640 
390.930 3,701,370 
82,630 
100 480 
50,380 
72,880 
8,950 
35,020 


942,060 
753,340 
587 845 
854,210 
768 385 
261,130 


4,166,970 
556 167 
613,370 


400,340 
48 430 
62,840 

537 


111 470 1.169 


1,559,280 15,974,547 


1,376,215 12,546,463 


TRADING ON N. ¥ 
Month 
Owt 


1929 


Year 
1929 
1,124,990,980 
ximated. 


following table gives the par value of the 


dealings in the various classes of bonds: 


October— 
$5,982,000 

5,112,900 

7,256,300 

10,462,800 

7,949,400 

4,729,000 


$41,492,400 
$6,303,000 
6,466,500 
1) 6,799,000 
12 
13 
14 


6,908 300 
3,366,600 


Five days 
$5,556,000 

5,343,100 

10,448,900 

10,927,800 

9,144,900 

3,704 600 

$45,125,300 

$7,439,900 
6,116,200 

5,807,200 

6,251,000 

4,706,000 

2,972,800 


$33,293,100 
4,627,600 
5,819,900 


0 
31 


Two days 


| Month 


$201,371,100 


October, 1943 


RECORD OF LARGEST VOLUME OF 


Day I 
Corporation 
Mar. 3, "43 
$31,747,000 


Day 
U. S. Govt 
Sept. 6, '39 
$72,317,000 


Corporations 


U 


&.G 
$9,000 
7.000 
4.500 
5.900 


6.5 


7,000 


$39,000 


$29,843,400 


$10,000 

» 000 

6,000 

Exchange closed—Columbus Day 
5.500 

15,000 


1 
4 
$88 


Y 


6,000 
26 000 
4.000 


yay 


Foreign 


June 12, '28 
$7,844,000 $83,234,000 


$6,000 
900 
6,000 

7.000 
1,000 


12 


$28 900 
1,000 
9,000 


$247,400 


$228,000 


TALS cos 


OFFSET SALES RISE 


Continued From Page 30 


ticularly in skilled workers. 


a | . 
4% |industry as a whole was laid pri- 
|marily to lack of manpower, par- 


In the 


|case of the corporation this was ac- 
17a, /cemtuated by a decline in the de- 
16% |mand for Bessemer steel products, 
jthe corporation having a 


larger 


proportion of Bessemer facilities 


than most companies. 


There were 152 work stoppages 


estimated 


was the best 
fewer spot 
months. 


strikes 


For the period from Jan. 
,Oct. 27, 1944, there were 467 stop-| 


pages, involving 1,561 


hours and 


than 


loss of 172,000 tons 
| steel output and 78,000 tons of coal 
| production, but the October record 

for the year, with 
earlier 


,000 


jin the third quarter, creating an 


of 


1 to 


man 


loss of 274,000 tons of 


coal and 710,000 tons of steel out- 
put, compared with 493 stoppages 
in all 1944, involving 3,736,000 man 
hours and loss of 2,183,000 tons of 


duction. 


}coal and 224,000 tons of steel pro- 


Backlogs are being reduced very 


‘gradually, Mr. Olds said, with steel 


bookings equivalent to five months’ 


joutput at current rates, compared 
|with a maximum backlog equiva- 


Northern, $1.58% @$1.60%,. |lent to about six months’ work at 


Kansas City—Wheat, No 
$1.58, @$1.72 


LIVESTOCK IN CHICAGO 


CHICAGO. Oct. 31 
the livestock markets 
Administration foliows 

HOGS 
13.000 
? and 
oi) t than Mor 
weights and sows around 
er weights nde ( nds 
pounds scarce £00 
$1 $14, toy 
$13.48 few 150-17 
300-500- pound 
good clearance 


2 hard, | 


| 


AP)—Today’'s 
here by the 


report of 
War Food 


Salable r 
weigt 
mos 
heavier 


tota 


dow! 
aa 


500 slow 
cents to} 
day's average 
25 cents low- 
ind nd over 270} 
olce 180-240 pounds, | 
pounds, $13.60- | 

r £13-$13.50: most 
40-$13.60, mostly $13.50 
shippers took 500 

CATTLE 

£006 total 


total 


ae 21 
pounds 


we 


ts 240 
y ce | 





Salable cattle 
es 1,00 


salable 

and 

>a quar 
earling trade 
w at decline 
t load $18.15; 
5 ws very 
lis extremely scarce 
5.50 down, steady 

firm trade on stockers 
)-$13.50: good and choice 
ings, $13 to $13.50 mostly. | 
SHEEP } 
Salable sheep 2,000; total 4,500: slaughter | 
lasses mostly steady: good and choice native | 
slaughter lambs, $14 to $14.40: bucks, $1 less: | 
medium and good. $12 to $13.75: common, | 
$9.75 to $11.50: Western range lambs absent 
Slaughter ewes. $4 to $6, according to grade: | 
three cars 101- nad Montanas, $4.50 carry- | 
ing No | 


ca 
year 
wer 
weve 
Joad jot 
Meughter 
ineven, mostly steady 
Steady to «trong 
to weak very activ 
and feeders at £10 
Western grass year! 


tor 


heite 


F 
1 pelts 


FUTURE CONTRACTS | factor for — reporting period 50 | 


COTTONSEED OIL 
High. Low. Close. Prev 
Close 


Con 
Trade 


the 


peak of the war job. There 


have been some cutbacks and can- 


cellations and some 


“failures 


to 


reorder,” but the over-all situation 


MORE CURBS BASED 


Continued From Page 30 


require import recommendations from 
most other Latin-American countries 


ACID: WPB 
struction of new 
fluoric acid, with 
Company of New 
struct a _ $700,000 
Rouge, La., with 
capacity and the Nyotex 
Company of Houston, 


has 


Genera 
York C 
plant 
a 


capacity of 3,900 tons. 
STOVES: In a numbe 
changes in stove 


tions coal-gas combinati 


to consumers 


FOOD INVENTORIES: The whole- 


salers’ processed foods 
ginning Dec. 
will be five, 


DAIRY PRODUCTS: 


> 


A 


6,000-ton 


authorized 
facilities for hydro- 
Chemical 
to con- 


l 
ity 

at 
t 


con- 


Baton 
annual 


Chemical 


Tex., 


r 


on 


to ex- 
|}pand its Houston plant to an annual | 


|}cedures under CMP to enlarge steel} 
of OPA| stocks in warehouses 
PIECEGOODS: The price exemp-| 
| ; stoves|tion period for cloth urgently needed | 
| will be made more readily available ‘ 


rationing regula-| 


inventory 


and ending Dec. 
the OPA announces 


ll sa 


30 


les of 


liquid whey were made free of price 


control by the OPA, effective Nov 


6, 


»00 


$9 000 
9,000 
000 


$81 000 


$10,000 


ON GIYILIAN OUTPUT 


| visory 


jabove 


vt Forelgr 
$502,000 
294 000 
319,000 
199 000 
227,000 
97,000 


00 


$1,638,000 
$249,500 
136,000 
219,000 


382,000 
172,000 
$1,258,500 
$141,000 
41,000 
149.000 
178,000 
235,000 
238,000 


$1,182,000 
$350,000 
34,000 
197,000 
352,000 

96 000 
107,000 
$1,536,000 
264 000 
291.000 
$555,000 


$6,169,500 


$7,276,500 


BOND TRADING ON N. Y¥ 
Day 
Total All 


Sept. 6 


Week 
Tota! 
Sept. 9, '39 
$204,707 ,300 


T 
39 


1 
1; 


Dec., 
$689,475 ,425 


Total 
All 
Stock 
815,940 
746,300 
821,030 
001,200 
802,170 
446,915 


4,633,645 


Dealt in 


|from which the averages are computed, as well as the total dealings! 
in the rails and industrials, and the combined trading in both classes} 
|of issues and the number of the latter appearing in the daily and| 


Chge 
Av'ge 
Price 

50 

Stks 


No. of 
Issues 

863 05 
853 


611,020 


598 210 


717,150 


683 95 
349 380 
2,959,355 

A450 
670,790 
908 21 
R28 TOO 
744,615 
356 530 


4,092,300 


024,690 
853,820 
638,225 
927,090 
827 335 
296,150 
567,310 


604,997 
676,210 


1,281,207 


7,533,817 
3,922,678 


STOCK 


No. Issues Day 


May 14 
1940 


1,049 


4) 


29 
08 
ty) 
8 6 10 
903 ~ 05 


18 


—- 152 


1,171 
1,161 


EXCHANGE 

Hour 

Oct. 29 

1929 
75,000,000 


daily and weekly 


’ 


ota 
All Bonds 


$6,493,000 


5,413, 90 


Net Chge 
Avg. Price 
40 


Bonds 


07 
) 04 


7,579,800 


10,666 800 


8,182,906 
4,833,006 


$43,169,400 


$6,562,506 
6,714, 50 
7,024,006 


7,335 80 
3,553, 60 


$5,706 ,00¢ 
5,593,106 
0,624 
1,111,806 
9,405, 906 
3,946 604 


1 
1 
S46 388 306 


6,363,100 
6,010,206 
6 606 ,006 
+, 003,006 
3,079, 80€ 


$34,858 006 
4,892, 60 
6,119,900 


31 
’ 
) 


61 
’ 
) 
) 


’ 
) 


~ $31,190,400 


) 
’ 


900 


) 
) 
’ 


$7,795,900 


) 
) 
) 
’ 
) 


’ 
’ 
) 


$11,012,500 


$166,618 600 


$208 875,000 


STOCK 
Month 
otal All 
1919 


39 
EXCHANGE 
Year 
Towml All 
1922 
$4,098 696,000 


of the corporation’s bookings has 
not been affected substantially, Mr. 


Olds added. 


The corporation has re-employed | 
veterans, 
were former employes. 


12,429 
6,184 


war 


of 


| still has more than 100,000 former 
| workers with the armed forces, 


| 


OTHER STEEL REPORTS 


Jones & Laughlin 


The Jones & Laughlin Steel Cor-! 
ration reported yesterday a con- 


i 
| po 


solidated net profit of $5,478,034 
for the first nine months of 1944, 


jafter $7,416,000 Federal 


taxes on 


income, equal to $2.04 a share on 
|the common stock, comparing with 


$7,060,581, or $3 


03 a 


share, after 


| $15,953,000 taxes, in the 1943 pe- 


riod. 


For the third quarter of 1944 net) 
profit was $1,889,847, or 


9 


ia 


cents 


la share, against $2,249,964, or 94 
jcents a share, in the 1943 period. 


Pittsburgh Steel 


|comparing 


2,55 


0, 


$1,3 


Pittsburgh Steel Company had a 
jnet profit of $12 
|share on the prior preferred stock, | 
ifor the first nine months of 1944,| 
with 
$22.82 a share, in the same period} 
jlast year. Net profit for the third| 


or $2.04 a 


60,284, or 


quarter was $195,451, or $3.25 a 


share on the prior preferred stock, | 
against $338,760, or $5.68 a share,| 


in the 1943 peri 


The directors declared a dividend | 


yd. 


of $1.3712 a share on the prior pre- 
ferred stock, the same as in previ- 


ous quarters of 
accumulated 
$1.37'% a share 


unpaid 


1944. 
di 
on 


this stock, 


There 
vidends 


are 
of 


which 60,058 shares are outstand- 


ing. 


;cations, effective 
nounced. 

FURNITURE: 
vey of the 
wood furniture 
that 


ir 


committee. 


Nov. 1 


A second OPA 
commercial 


idustry 


WMC an- 


public 
shown 


and 
has 


no industry-wide price increase 
warranted, the agency told the ad- 


SNAP BEANS: The shipping point 


ceiling of al 
except 
has been 
from Nov. 
announced, 
tail set at 


COTTON 


price 
those 
1 thro 
with 
nearly 
Tem] 


emergency open yard storage of raw | 


cotton in Oklahon 
established by tt 
Oct 31 of 60 cen 
homa and 25 cent 
existing 
STEEL: WPB 


produced 
increased $1.65 
Nov 
the 


fresh 
ir 


l 


ugh 
incr 
6 cents 
rary 

1” and 
ic 
ts 
8 


ba 
ba 


a 
a 


warehouse 


is stu 


OPA 


snap 
California 
a bushel 
30, OPA 
"ease at re- 
a pound. 

ceilings for 


) 


Texas were 


le Okla 


le 


in 
in 
prices. 


dying pro- 


for military use was again extended 


two months to Jan 
|effective immediately, covering wind- | 
resistant, water-repellent oxford ma-| 


terials of combed 
bags and shelter 


cotton 
tents. 


1 by OPA today, | 


yarns for 


COMMODITY PRICES 


16 | 


+ 1.05) 


whom | 
It | 


of | 


sur-/| 


beans | 


effective | 


Texas | I 
| All bonds must be presented either to Con. | 


CK EXCHANGE TRADING IN OCTOBER| (()TTQN PRICES QFE 


BY 1 TO 4 POINTS 


| Trade Operations in Day’s 
Session on Exchange 


Prices of cotton futures on the 
New York Cotton Exchange de- 
clined yesterday 1 to 4 points net. 
Business was limited to small 
trade operations. After opening 2 
points lower to 2 points higher 
than it had closed on Monday, the 
market became uninteresting 

Not much cotton was offered in 
the South and farmers are pre- 
paring cotton for the buying pro- 
gram of the Commodity Credit 
Corporation. Today the CCC’s buy- 
ing price will advance 5 points to 
| 21.95 cents a pound for 15/16-inch 
|middling staple at Memphis and 
21.91 cents at New Orleans, with 
|differentials for other localities. 

The first sales of December, 
| 1945, delivery were made yesterday 
jat 20.60 cents and 20.61 cents, 
}103 and 104 points, respectively, 
j}under the December, 1944, delivery. 
The discounts of the forward 
months reflect a belief in the cot- 


ton trade that the cotton program} 
will undergo fundamental changes} 
before the end of the current sea-| 


| gon 
Yesterday's 
follow: 


market 


NEW YORK FUTURES 

Prev 
Close 
21.62 


Year 
Ag 
Holt 


Low 
21.60 


1944— 
Dec 
1945 
Jan 
March 
| May 
| July 
| Oct 
Dec 
1946— 
March 
n Nominal b Bid 
Monday's sales, 40 
1,335,600 bales, off .3,400 bales 
SPO? MARKETS 
(15/16-Inch Middling) 
Price Prev Sales 
(Cents). Day (Bales 
1.00 21.00 7,163 
21% 120 
1.20 1.20 
dy) 1.2% 
125 
21.87 
72 
1.30 
1 A? 
21.25 
1.37 


Higt 
21.65 


Close 
21.61-.62 


21.54n 
21.469 
21.70 
21,50 
10.72D-.74a 
20.52b- 57a 


1.55 
1.73 
21.74 
21.52 
0.71 
20.52 


21.75 
21.75 
21.55 
20.76 
20.61 


21.69 
21.70 
21.50 
20.73 
20.60 


Holiday 
Holiday 
Holiday 
Holiday 
Holiday 


71 


20.42b- 
a Asked 
200 bales 


47a 20.42 


open 


Dallas 
Galveston 
Houston 
New Orleans 
Memphis 
Augusta 
Charleston 
Montgomery 
Savannah 
Little Rock 
rage pr 


?.521 
7,758 
21 068 


) 
25 
76 
71 
1) 
62 


57 
112 
617 

33 
25 1,043 
ave ice 
10,872 4,908 


Holiday 


Tota sales 
New York 
n Nominal 


22.09n 22.12n 


Heads Pittsburgh Coal Unit 

PITTSBURGH, Oct. 31 (® 
Kingsford E. Graburn of Toronto, 
}Ont., was elected president of the 
Pittsburgh Coal Company, Ltd., 
Canadian subsidiary of the Pitts- 
burgh Coal Company, it was an- 
nounced today. He succeeds the 
late Percy F. Ballou. 


Business Is Limited to Small |i, th 


or} 


statistics) 


day | 


Holiday | It 


interest, | 


COTTON CLOTH RACKET | 
ON PRICES LAID TO 17 


Sales of 10,000,000 yards of cot- 
ton cloth at price excesses esti- 
mated at $678,500 were attributed 
ree corporations and fourteen 
lindividuals in criminal informa- 
tions filed yesterday 
court. 


Attorney. 

The prosecutor said Office of 
Price Administration ceilings had 
|been exceeded by 8 to 50 cents a 





through fraudulent invoicing, 
‘correct statement of yardage sold, 


in Federal | 
The charges were made by| 
John F. X. McGohey, United States | 


|yard and the overage was either) 
jopenly collected or exacted secretly | 
in- | 


R 1, 1944. 





jupgrading of items to fetch higher | 


ceiling prices or cash 
|The defendants and the number of 
counts against each were listed as 
| follows: 


Belfast Fabrics Corporation and 
Samuel Paris, treasurer, 1465 Broad- 
way, 33 counts. 

Seymour Knapp, trading as J. Levine 
Company—Department Knapp, 
Broadway, 15 counts. 

Knapp, trading as Poinsett Convert- 
ing Company, 401 Broadway, 


counts 
54_Bighth Avenue, 
te" ' 


° 
- 


Arthur Streit, 1 

counts 

idney Kaufman, 
man Manufacturing Company, 

Weat Fortieth Street, 4 counts 

Max Margulius, 
counts, 

Klein & Forgosh, 
Klein, president, 
teenth Street, 21 counts. 

Abraham Wise, E. J. Schwam and 
Charles Blumberg, trading as Todon 
Textiles, 71 Franklin Street, 23 
counts 

|Blumberg, trading as Fordham Tex- 
tile Company, 320 Broadway, 20 
counts, 

Al and 


Is trading as Kauf- 


Inc., and Charles 
11 East Seven- 





Ralph Janoff, 
Tudor Textile Company, 
enth Avenue, 29 counts. 

|New England Textile Corporation 

and Jack Litwack, president and 
treasurer, 379 Broadway, 15 counts 

‘ving Cohen, trading as H. Cohen 

& Sons, 470 Broadway, 26 counts 

Sohen, trading as Popular Fabrics 
165 Broadway, 46 counts 

David Denner, 225 First 
counts 


STOCK EXCHANGE NOTES 


The New York Stock Exchange 
|nas ruled that commissions may 
be arranged by mutual agreement 
jin deals in the New York Railways 
|Corporation’s stamped prior lien 
|mortgage 6 per cent Series A gold 


trading 


Avenue, 23 


Holiday | 


»|bonds due in 1958, which have been 


called for redemption on Jan. 1 at 
|105 and interest. 


The Exchange has suspended 
from dealings the Pittsburgh, Cin- 
cinnati, Chicago & St. Louis Rail- 
road Company’s general mortgage 
Series C 414 per cent bonds due in 
1977, which have been called for re- 
demption. 


Spencer Trask & Co. 
yesterday a special offering of 12,- 
000 shares of Link-Belt Company’s 
stock at 39%, with special com- 
mission of 75 cents. 














REDEMPTION NOTICES 


Notice of Redemption 


KANSAS CITY TERMINAL 
RAILWAY COMPANY 


| First Mortgage Four Por Cent. Gold Bonds 
Due January |, 1960. 


NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that 
suant to provisions of the Mortgage and 
Deed of Trust, dated January 3, 1910, of 
Kansas City Terminal Railway Company 
to Ulinois Trust and Savings Bank and 
Samuei W. Moore. Trustees, (Continental 
Illinois National Bank and Trust Company 
of Chicago and E. E. Amick being the 
present Trustees thereunder) 
Terminal Railway Company intends to re- 
deem and will redeem on January 1, 1949 


all of the First Mortgage Four Per Cent, | 
issued | 


Gold Bonds, due January 1. 4960, 


and outstanding thereunder. 


Accordingly. on January 1, there 


1945 


will become and be due and payable upon | 


Mortgage Four Per Cent 
Gald Bond, due January 1, 1960, at 
office of Continental Illinois National! 
Bank and Trust Company of Chicago. at 


each such First 


nois, the principal of the bonds called for 
redemption together with the interest ac- 
crued thereon to January 1! 


the par value of said bonds. From and 
after January 1, 1945 interest on such 
bonds will cease to accrue and coupons for 


interest maturing subsequent to that date | 


will be void 

} Such bonds should be presented and sur- 
the place of payment stated above on or 
after January 1, 1945. The sum due for 
| principal and premium of each coupon 
| bond called for redemption shall be pay- 
able to the bearer of such coupon bond 
shall have been registered, then such 
ayment shall be made to the registered 
Polder of such registered coupon bond or 
his assigns, but in no case shall the 
Kansas City Terminal Railway Company 
be required to make payment, except upon 
surrender of such bond and of ali 
coupons for interest thereon maturing 
fter January 1, 1945. Ali interest which 
Mail have matured on or prior to Janu- 
ary 1, 1945 shall be payable, but with- 
out interest thereon, to the respective 
bearers of such coupons The sum pay- 
able upon registered bonds without cou- 
pons upon 


it 


presentation and surrender 
thereof for principal and premium and for 
accrued interest from July 1, 1944 to Janu- 


| ary 1, 1945 shall be paid to the registered | 


| holders of such bonds or their assigns. If 

coupon bonds registered as to principal or 
registered bonds without coupons shall 
have been assigned, they must be accom- 
panied by duly executed instruments of 
assignment and by stamps in the proper 
amount covering any government transfer 
tax due by reason of such assignment. 


Dated: October 4, 1944. 


KANSAS CITY TERMINAL RAILWAY 


COMPANY 
By B. J. Duffy. President 


PRIOR PAYMENT OFFER 


On and after October 4, 1944, 
ers may present their bonds accompanied 
by (in the case of coupon bonds) all inter- 
est coupons maturing subsequent to July 1, 
1944. for payment in advance prior to 


January 1, 1945, at the full redemption 


pur- | 


Kansas City | 


the | 


231 South LaSalle Street, Chicago 90, Illi- | 


1945 and not | 
previously paid and a premium of 5% upon | 


rendered for redemption and payment at) 


unless it shall have been registered, and if | 


' 
bondhold- 


price of 105% plus accrued and unpaid in- | 


terest to January 1, 1945 
prior to November 1944 will be held in 
trust until that date, when payment of the 
redemption price will be made promptly 
| Payment of bonds presented on and after 
November 22, 1944 will be made at once. 


29 


tinental Illinois National Bank and Trust 
Company of Chicago, 231 South La Salle 
Street, Chicago 90, Mlinois, or J. P. Morgan 
& Co. Inc., 23 Wall Street, New York 5. 


N.Y 
KANSAS CITY TERMINAL RAILWAY 
COMPANY, 
By B. J. Duffy, President. 


REDEMPTION NOTICE 
TO THE HOLDERS OF 


“Missouri-lIllinois Railroad Company 


— OO 


First Mortgage 5% Bonds, Series A, 
due January 1, 1959 


issued under Indenture dated January 1, 1929. 
| To the Holders of the Outstanding Series 
A, 5% Bonds of the Missouri-Illinois 
Railroad Company secured by its Mort- 
gage dated January 1, 1929. 

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN by the above 
jnamed Company of its election to redeem all 
of its outstanding Series A, 5% Bonds on the 


14.30 8 


14.30 


14.00 
14.00 
14.31n 


Oct., 


to end confusion over proper pricing 
Juls ABRASIVES: Purchasers of coated 
13.00@|/abrasive products and certain types 
of hand tools are no longer required | 
to file forms WPB-3478 and 1319, re-| 
| spectively, to obtain specific authori-| Oats, 2, white, bu... - 80% | 
zation from the WPB, the agency| Flour, spring pat., 100 lbs.. 3.75 
announced. | Coffee, 7, Rio, Ib *.09%, | 
WRIST WATCHES: A iimited num-| Coffee, 4, Santos, Ib... aed 
ber of non-jeweled wrist watches} C0°C0a, Bahia, Ib.. $0835 
with second hands, designed espe-| Sugar, granulated, *-0550 
cially for nurses, are again available,| Sus4r, raw, c.i.f., Ib.. 0375 
the WPB reported. Butter, 92 score, Bc camestac * 4214 
RESIDUAL OIL: Residual fuel oil| Lard, Midwest, Ib 
|}may be used again for road building | MISCELLANEOUS~— 
and maintenance operations in all} Hides, packers, light, Ib... 
| parts of the country except on the| Gas., tank wag., dir., gal. 
|; West Coast, Deputy Petroleum Ad-| Crude oil, Mid-C., 33 to 33.9 
ministrator Davies announced. gravity, barrel...... 
MATCHES: Approximately 90 per Ki 
}eent of box matches and 25 per cent METALS— 
|of book types in the next six months| [fn, 2, Philadelphia, ton 
| will go to the armed forces, the WPB ee cant gg Boe ton 
| reporte Steel scrap, y., s., 
min LAKES SHIPPING: Eight Antimony, American, Ib.. 
jover-age Great Lakes steamers have| Aluminum, Ib............. 
|been returned to the Maritime Com-| °PPer, electro., lb...... 
|mission for disposal under provisions) Quicksilver, flask 
lof the Merchant Marine Act of 1936,; Lead, Ib....-... ss ..e see 
jthe War Shipping Administration re-| Zinc, East St. Louis, Ib.... 
|ported. They are part of thirty-six | Zinc, New York, Ib 
jtaken as a trade-in on sixteen ore} Tin, Straits, lb 
- |carriers built by the commission. | TEXTILES— 
LY ha Dat Etim og LABOR SHORTAGE AREAS: Ce-| Cotton, mid., 15/16 in., Ib. 2209 
ii Darreis, , ’ dar Rapids, Iowa, was moved from Printcloths, 64/60, yard... *.09439 
89 385: stocks,| @roup II to the more critical Group I | “Ceilings or permissible prices fixed by the| 
in the revised labor market classifi-! office of Price Administration. nNominal 


March 4.1 
May 
Closing 
13.80@ 14.20 
13.30 
Sales 


Dec.-Jan 


13.10@13.40 


14.1 
prices 


Sept 


Oct. 31, 1944, 
*$1.87 


*1.35 


FOODSTUFFS— 
Wheat, 2, red, bu 
Corn, 2, yellow, bu 
tye, yellow, bu. 

9 


12? 
de 9 


tank car loads 
COCOA 
Closing prices: Dec.-May, 8.86b 


BLACK PEPPER 
Closing prices: Dec., Jan., Mar 


Sept., 6.63b 
WOOL TOPS 


Lo 
13: 


127.2 


July, ; 
| Ist day of Janwary, 1945. Payment will be made 
jupon said Bonds at the office of the Trustee, 
|The Chase National Bank of the City of New 
|York, 11 Broad Street, New York, N. Y., at 
ithe rate of 105% of the par of said Bonds, to- 
|gether with all interest accrued on such Bonds 
ito said date. Holders of said Bonds are hereby 
}notified that said Bonds shall be presented in 
jnegotiable form at said office on the Ist day 
jof January, 1945, together with all appurtenant 
jcoupons representing accrued interest thereon 
land all appurtenant coupons maturing after 
said redemption date, and ownership certifi- 
cates properly executed to cover interest pay- 
lable: if any coupon Bond so designated for 
redemption shall be presented for redemption 
unaccompanied by any coupons representing 
interest accrued thereon Bond shall be 
paid at the redemption price applicable at said 
date 


May 


Prev 
Close. 
132.3b-132.5a 131.6 
127.1b-127.2a 127.1 
123.8b-124.0a 123 
120.0t 119 


High Close 
132.0 


127.2 


w 
2.0 





120.0 120.0 
134.0b 
GREASE WOOL 
75 $7.5 87.2b- 87.8a 87 
92.5b-93.3a 


*.15%4 
*.1060 
*1.11 


x 0 


gs Dec., 94.5n: Mai 
25.84 

*34.00 
17.00 

* 15@.15'% 
°.15 
°*12 


*117.00n 


such 


NAVAL STORES 


aid date ind afte: anuary 1 145 no 
int t will accrue upon r in respect to said 
Bonds, nor will any coupons, belonging to such 
© nak Bonds, which mature subsequent to January 1, 
0650 | 1945. be of any force or effect, nor will the 
*.0825 holder of any such Bonds be entitled to any 
* 0864 | benefit under the above-named First Mortgage 
*n9 securing said Bonds. excepting to receive pay- 
‘ ment of the redemption price on or after Jan- 
| uary 1, 1945, in accordance with the provisions 
of this Notice. 
Dated October 23, 1944. 


MISSOURI-ILLINOIS RAIL 
/ By L 


31 (‘AP 
offerings 
shipments 


SAVANNAH, Ga Oct 
7h, - 


receipts 


Turpentine 
no saies 
barrels 


ents g£a..or no 
barrels 
1 barrels 
100-ib. drums 
pts. 134; shipments. 209; stocks, 56.223 
B. $5.05; D, $5.12; E, $5.65; F, $5.75; 
; H, $5.81: I, $5.81; K, $5.85; M. $5.87; 
WG, $6.28; WW, $6.55; X, $6.55 
JACKSONVILLE. Fia., 
tine: Receipts 
38.210 barrels 
Rosin: Receipts 
24.939 


a” 


no offerings; no sales 


ROAD COMPANY, 
W. BALDWIN 


shipments 
President. 


but without any interest accrued thereon | 


Bonds presented | 





| 





REDEMPTION NOTICES 


Notice of Redemption 


TO HOLDERS OF 
PACIFIC GAS AND 
ELECTRIC COMPANY’S 
FIRST AND REFUNDING 
MORTGAGE BONDS OF 
SERIES H (3%%) 


DUE DECEMBER 1, 1961 


NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN by PACIFIC 
GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY, a Califor- 
nia corporation, that it will redeem, on Janu- 
ary 1, 1945, at the office of City Bank Farmers 
Trust Company at William Street, in the 
Borough of Manhattan, City and State of New 
York, and at the office of Pacific Gas and Elec- 
tric Company at 245 Market Street, in the City 
and County of San Francisco, State of Califor- 
nia, all of its outstanding First and Refunding 
Mortgage Bonds of Series H, 34%, due De 
cember 1, 1961; that, upon the presentation and 
surrender of said bonds, on or after the redemp- 
tion date at cither of said specified places of re 
demption, with (in the case of coupon bonds) all 
interest coupons maturing subsequently to said 
date of redemption, and (in the case of regis- 
tered bonds or of coupon bonds registered as to 
principal) accompanied by duly executed as 
signments or transfer powers, there will be paid 
to the holders thereof the redemption price 
specified therein ; and that interest will cease to 
accrue on all of said bonds of Series H on the 
date herein specified for their redemption. 





GIVEN that, if the holders of any of said 
bonds of Series H shall surrender them, in 
the form above provided, for redemption at 
said office of City Bank Farmers Trust Com- 


tric Company or at the office of American 
Trust Company, at 464 California Street, San 
Francisco, California, at any time after the 
date of this notice, there will be paid to them 
the principal sum named therein, a premium 
of 7'4% upon such principal sum, and all 
interest accrued and to accrue to and including 


January 1, 
thereto, if presented with the bonds, will be 
paid at the same time. 
By Order of the Board of Directors, 
RAYMOND KINDIG, Secretary of 
PACIFIC GAS AND 
ELECTRIC COMPANY 


San Francisco, Calif., 
November 1, 1944, 








Notice of Redemption 


City of Philadelphia 
Bonds 


hereby given that the following 
1 jonds of the City of Philadelphia 
aggregating Four Hundred Eighty-five 
Thousand Five Hundred (485.500) Dollars 
being the outstanding balance of bonds 
aggregating Three Million (3,000,000) Dol- 
lars issued on January 1. 1925 (pursuant 
to the provisions of an Ordinance approved 
December 30, 1919. which supplemented 
an Ordinance approved June 29, 1916, and 
authorized the creation of a loan or loans 
aggregating Sixty-two Million One Hun- 
dred Thousand (62,100,000) Dollars and 
which Ordinance was amended by Ordi- 
nances approved November 18, 1920, Jan- 
uary 26, 1921. and January 14, 1922): also 
2. Bonds of the City of Philadelphia 
aggregating Nine Hundred Three Thousand 
Three Hundred (903.300 Dollars being 
the outstanding balance of bonds aggre- 
gating Three Million (3,000,000) Dollars 
issued on January 1, 1925 (pursuant to 
the provisions of an Ordinance effective 
October 5. 1923. which authorized the 
creation of a loan or loans aggregating 
Sixty-seven Million Two Hundred Fifty 
Thousand (67,250,000) Dollars also 

3. Bonds of the City of Philadelphia 
aggregating Seven Hundred Ninety-five 
Thousand Two Hundred (795,200) Dollars 
being the outstanding balance of bonds 
aggregating Five Million (5,000,000) Dol- 
ars issued on January 1, 1925 (pursuant 
to the provisions of an Ordinance ap- 
proved September 22. 1924, which author- 
ized the creation of a loan or loans ag- 
gregating Thirty-five Million Seven Hun- 
dred Twenty-six Thousand (35.726.000) 
Dollars). 

which bonds are due January 1, 
and are redeemable at par and ac- 
crued interest at the expiration of 
twenty (20) vears from January 1, 1925, 
the date of issuance thereof, or at any 
interest period thereafter. upon sixty (60) 
days’ notice by public advertisement have 
(pursuant to Ordinances approved August 
31, 1944) been called for redemption on 
January 1, 1945. and interest on all of 
the ‘sald outstanding bonds of such issues 
will cease on that date and any interest 
coupons attached thereto will become void 
except as to interest accrued to that date 
Bonds with all unmatured coupons at- 
tached must be presented for redemption 
and payment to the Philadelphia National 
Bank. fiscal agent of the City of Phila- 
delphia at its office. 421 Chestnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Bonds regis- 
tered as to principal alone or as to both 
principal and interest must be accompa- 
nied by appropriate instruments of assign 
ment executed in blank 
WILLIAM W. FELTON, 

Clerk of Council 


Notice ts 


1975, 


| 


Alert investors who want profitable results 
turn to The New York Times for information. 


449 


15 


110} 


395 Broadway, 11 
“ | 


bonuses. 





as! 
499 Sev-| 


| 


i 


effected 


FURTHERMORE, NOTICE IS HEREBY | 


pany or at said office of Pacific Gas and Elec- | 


| 


1945, without discount, Coupons | 
for interest due December 1, 1944, or prior | 


| 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


| DEPOSITARY: 


| Secretary: 


NU4 


REDEMPTION NOTICE 


wal 


REDEMPTION NOTICE 


REDEMPTION NOTICE 


NOTICE OF REDEMPTION 


GREAT NORTHERN RAILWAY COMPANY 
EASTERN RAILWAY COMPANY OF MINNESOTA 


NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN to all holders of bonds outstanding of the following issues: 


Great NORTHERN RAiLway COMPANY 
First and Refunding Mortgage 444 % Gold Bonds, due July 1, 1961, 
issued under and secured by the Indenture of Mortgage, dated 


May 1, 1911, between Great Northern Railway Company and 
Bankers Trust Company, Trustee; 


Great NortHern Ratutway Company 


General Mortgage 4% Convertible Bonds, Series G and Series H. 
due July 1, 1946, 
issued under and secured by the General Gold Bond Mortgage, 
dated January 1, 1921, between Great Northern Railway Company 
and The First National Bank of the City of New York, Trustee, 
and under and by indentures supplemental! thereto; 


Great NorrHern Raitway Company 
Collateral Trust 4% Bonds, due serially to, and on, January 1, 1952, 
issued under and secured by Indenture, dated as of January 1, 
1940, between Great Northern Railway Company and President 
and Directors of the Manhattan Company, commonly known as 
Bank of the Manhattan Company, Trustee; and 


EASTERN RaiLway COMPANY OF MINNESOTA 


Northern Division First Mortgage Fifty-Year 4% Gold Bonds, 
due April 1, 1948, 
issued under and secured by the Indenture of Mortgage, dated 
April 1, 1898, between said Eastern Railway Company of 
Minnesota and Mercantile Trust Company (now Bankers Trust 
Company by succession), Trustee, and assumed by 
Great Northern Railway Company 


that, pursuant to the provisions of said Bonds and of the above mentioned instru- 
ments securing the same, respectively, 


Great NORTHERN RatLway Company has elected to redeem and pay off, and 
will redeem and pay off, on January 1, 1945, the entire issues outstanding of its 
First and Refunding Mortgage 414 % Gold Bonds, due July 1, 1961, 

General Mortgage 4% Convertible Bonds, Series G and Series H, due July 1, 1946 
(other than any of said General Mortgage 4% Convertible Bonds 
Series G, which have previously been called for redemption on 
July 1, 1943 and have not yet been surrendered therefor), and 

Collateral Trust 4% Bonds, due serially to, and on, January 1, 1952; 


that on said date of redemption (January 1, 1945) there will become and be 
due and payable on each of said Bonds so to be redeemed, at the office of 
The First National Bank of the City of New York, the Agent of the under- 
signed, 2 Wall Street, in the Borough of Manhattan, City and State of New 
York, the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest thereon to said date 
of redemption (January 1, 1945) and a premium upon the principal thereof 
as follows: 


5% in the case of the First and Refunding Mortgage 4'4 % Gold Bonds; 


1% in the case of the General Mortgage 4°% Convertible Bonds. Series G 
and Series H; and 


4% in the case of the Collateral Trust 4% Bonds: 
and that on January 1, 1945 interest on all said Bonds will cease to accrue; and 


EasTERN Ratyway CoMPANY OF MINNESOTA has elected to redeem, and pay off, 
and will redeem, and pay off, on April 1, 1945, the entire issue outstanding of its 


Northern Division First Mortgage Fifty-Year 4% Gold Bonds, due April 1, 1948, 


assumed by Great Northern Railway Company; that on said date of redemp- 
tion (April 1, 1945), there will become due and payable on each of said Bonds 
so to be redeemed, at the above mentioned office of The First Nationa! Bank 
of the City of New York, the Agent of the undersigned, the principal amount 
thereof plus accrued interest thereon to said date of redemption ( April 1, 1945) 
and a premium of 5% upon the face value thereof; and that on April 1, 1945, 
interest on said Bonds will cease to accrue. 


All of the above mentioned Bonds are required to be presented for redemption and 
surrendered on the respective redemption dates for such payment and redemption 
at said office of The First National Bank of the City of New York, the Agent of 
the undersigned, 2 Wall Street, New York 15, N. Y., with all appurtenant cou- 
pons maturing after the respective redemption dates. 

The above mentioned General Mortgage 4% Convertible Bonds, Series G and 
Series H, will continue to be convertible in accordance with their terms into Pre- 
ferred Stock of Great Northern Railway Company until and including the above 
mentioned redemption date thereof unless paid prior therete 

GREAT NORTHERN RAILWAY COMPANY 
By F. J. GAVIN, President 


EASTERN RAILWAY COMPANY OF MINNESOTA 
By F. J. GAVIN, President. 


St. Paul, Minnesota, 
October 31, 1944. 


Notice of Immediate Payment 


Holders of the above Bonds may immediately obtain the full redemption price 
thereof, including premium and accrued interest to the specified redemption dates, 
by surrendering such Bonds with all unmatured appurtenant coupons, to The 
First National Bank of the City of New York, at its said office, No. 2 Wall Street, 
New York 15, N. Y. 
GREAT NORTHERN RAILWAY COMPANY 
By F. J. GAVIN, President. 


DIVIDEND 


FINANCIAL NOTICE NANCIAL NOTICES 


Atias Corporation 


Dividend No. 33 
on 6% Preferred Stock 


Noricr a 
jend of 


To the Holders of 
Caribbean Sugar Company 


First Mortgage 7% Bonds 
Due August 1, 1941 


Committee Representing 
5% Seerred Notes of 


SEABOARD AIR LINE 


RAILWAY COMPANY | 


Notice of Adoption and Approval | 
of Plan of Reorganization 


’ HEREBY 
er 


a 
g 


Notice ts hereby ai 
ment & Trading Cory 
| ferred to as the Corporation) 
lable to Bankers Trust Company 
| Street, New York 15, N. Y.. as Agent 
of Six Hundred Thousand Dollars, for u 
the purchase of Caribbean Sugar Compan 
First Mortgage 7% Bonds due August I, 1941 
at the lowest prices for which such bonds may 
be tendered to it for that purpose. | 

Bondholders desiring to sell any or all of 
their bonds to the Corporation are invited to 
submit tenders for the purchase thereof to 
Bankers Trust Company, 16 Wali Street, 
New York 15, N. Y., or to Bank of America 
National Trust and Savings Association, | 
Corporate Trust Division, 300 Montgom- 
ery Street, San Francisco, California, on 
or before November 29, 1944. Appropriate 
forms for use in submitting such tenders, to 
gether with a form of notice in connection 
therewith have heretofore been mailed to all 
of the known holders of such bonds, who have 
previously presented their bonds to the First 
National Bank of Boston, Trustee, for the! 
purpose of receiving the payments authorized | 
under the Second Transitory Provision 
Title Fourth of the Constitution of Cuba 
| adopted on June 4, 1940. Additional copies of 
such forms and notice are available at the| 
office of Bankers Trast Company or Bank of 


ven that Manopla Invest = 


rat (he natter ¢ 
oration hereimmatte t \ embe 


made avail 
16 W 


the sur 


To Holders of Certificates of Deposit for —e . the ¢ 
Seaboard Air Line Railway Company 3% 


Secured Notes: 
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the under- 


signed Committee has adopted and approved 
the Plan of Reorganization of Seaboard Air 
Line Railway Company, which has heen ap- 
proved by the United States District Court for 
the Eastern District of Virginia by Orders 
entered December 10, 1943 and September 8, 
1944, and by the United States District Court 
for the Southern District of Florida by Orders 
dated December 14, 1943 and September 9, 
1944. Copies of the Plan and a brief summary 
thereof may be obtained from the Depositary 
of the Committee. 

Any Depositor desiring to dissent from the 
Plan may do so by filing with the Depositary 
of the Committee at the address indicated be- 
low a written notice of such dissent which 
shall specify the name of the Depositor and 
the dates and numbers of the Certificates of 
Deposit held by him at any time on or before 
December 1, 1944. Depositors may also with- 
draw their notes at any time on or before said 
date by the payment of their pro rata share of 
the Committee’s indebtedness and expenses 


and surrender to the Depositary of the Com- . I : V f P 
i America National Trust and Savings Asso-| bearing Serial 


i 
Novembe 


Wattee A. Prresso» 
October 30, 1944 


ness 


PROPOSALS 


UNION BARGE LINE CORPORATION 
NOTICE 
Request tor Bids 
Separate and sealed Proposals w 
at or before Noon. £ 
December 1, 1944, 
about 2:00 P. M 
day by Alex W. Dann 
Union Barge Line 
Avenue, Pittsburg 
sals to be for t 
A. Constructi 
1) and/< 
steel 
draft full 
f west 





ot} 


Visions a 


s 


this lst day of 


e 


MEETING NOTICE 


LAWYERS TRUST COMPANY, 
111 Broadway, New York 6, N. Y. 


| nial ; 
GEORGIA SOUTHERN AND FLORIDA 
RAILWAY COMPANY 
Macon, Georgia, October 21, 1944. 
A special meeting cf stockholders of Georgia 
Southern and Florida Railway Company will be 
held at the office of the Company in Macon, 
Georgia, on Wednesday, November 22, 1944, at 
12:00 o’clock noon, for the purpose of consider- 
ing reduction in the number of directors and 
of electing such new directors as may be 
necessary to fill vacancies on the Board of Di- 
rectors as may then exist. and for the trans- 
action of any other business that may law- 
fully come before sald meeting. 
Cc. EB. A. McCARTHY, Secretary. 


ar 
at 


HAROLD PF. HEALEY, 


Exchange or by any commercial bank or trust a : steel. twin screw. Dies 
& Trading Corporation 
wd d by the Pl nent thereto, in accordance wit 
boun y the an. r ~ 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant| and Serial No. 4, wit! 

GEORGE McANENY 

ginning at the close of business on November| Osbourne, Executive 
Company acting under a Deposit) November, 1944 ae ae 

2) towboats 
25 Cliff Street, New York 7, N. Y. |ing Serial No. 3 or Contract bearing 


mittee of their Certificates of Deposit properly ‘ fal 
endorsed for transfer with signature guaran- ciation, upon request. ls pane ane ~er ‘4 
teed by any member of the New York Stock ae ee os 
Rng Manopla investment (1) and/or two 
company having a correspondent in the City draft full model tu : 
of New York. By R. C. WIGGIN. P for western river flee 
Depositors who fail to dissent from the Plan ap seboan pe vesident.| — R.. # - ah. 
or to withdraw their notes from deposit will| Dated: November 1, 1944. ' r - 
- ———~-- visions of a p sed Contract 
No further deposits are being acce b > HINIES . } bearing Serial ’ 
stu as BURDINES, INC. | plans nd spec 
: Notice of Closing of Stock Transfer Books | Copies of said Contra 
Dated, Moveater 4, 2064. t lution of the Board of Directors of) specifications roposa 
' 0 resolutio’ © 0 rific Ss, propose 
EDWIN C. JAMESON, Chairman) Burdines, Inc., the Stock Transfer Books ot | may be made, enve 
the Common Stock of Burdines, Inc., a Florida} and other informatic 
EDWIN G. MERRILL corporation, will ve closed for the period be-j| tion to Alex W. Dan 
STEELE DuBOSQUE 14, 1944, and ending at the close of business! Barge Line Corpor 
Committee Representing 5% Secured|on November 20, 1944 Pittsburgh. Pennsy 
Notes of Seaboard Air Line Railway| Dated at Miami, Florida : wy? may bid on one 
wo identical owboats 
Agreement dated January 30, 1931. FREELAND B. CRESAP. Secretary bearing Serial No. 3 
oi Serial Ne 4 or under 
builders who bid on on 1 
either or both Contracts w 
in event two (2 
Union Barge Line Corp 
ibid for one (1 towboat j r 
| identical towboats under either < 
}4, but will mot accept bids unde 
itracts. Union Barge Line Corporation ecil 
j}caily reserves the right to reject any and a 
bids 


Q 


is entered tf 
required ¢ 


pric 


for 


At the time a Contract 
successful Bidder wil) be 
in the amount of the contract 
and sufficient corporate surety 
pany to be approved by the Owne 4! 
for the faithful and prompt performance of ¢ 
Contract. 





FINANCIAL 


EDISON NET PR PROFIT | Elected to Directorship 


DECLINES SLIGHTLY 


In General Steel Castings 


$32,022,668 Is Reported for 


Year to Sept. 30, Compared 
With $32,877,256 


The report of the Consolidated | 
Edison Company of New York, 
Inc., for the year ended on Sept.| 


30, showed yesterday a consoli-| 
dated net income, after operating | 
expenses, taxes and other charges, | 
of $32,022,668. This was equal, after| 
preferred dividend requirements, to| 
$1.84 a share on the company’s} 
outstanding common stock, and) 
compares with $32,877,256, or $1.91 
a common share, in the preceding 
twelve months. 

Gross operating revenues of the 
Edison system for the _ twelve} 
months were $290,320,524, com-| 
pared with $266,689,142 in the pre- 
ceding period. Operating revenue 
deductions amounted to $237,155,- 
853, against $215,772,311. The re- 
port showed taxes of $66,649,024, | 
compared with $60,734,157 a year) 
earlier. 


The Quarterly Figures 


For the three months to Sept. 
30, the company reported a con-| 
solidated net income of $2,565,953 
after expenses and charges. This 
was equal to $1.17 a share on the} 
company’s outstanding $5 preferre d| 
stock, and compares with a net of 
$3,527,518, or 7 cents a common} 
share, after full preferred dividend 
requirements, in the September 
quarter a year ago. Gross revenues 
for the quarter were $63,985,492, 
against $60,645,206. 

The Consolidated Edison Com-| 
pany, alone, as parent concern of! 
the system, reported a net income 
of $29,822,666 for the year ended 
Sept. 30. This was equal, after pre- 
ferred dividend charges, to $1.64 a 
common share, and compares with/| 
$33,198,851, or $1.94 a share, in| 
the twelve months to Sept. 30, 1943. | 

For the third quarter of this 
year, the parent company showed 
a net income of $4,267,647, or 13 
cents a common share, compared 
with $3,924,237, or 10 cents a share, 
in the September quarter a year) 
ago. 


| 





CHICAGO EDISON GAINS 


$22,714,062 Serned in Year to 
Sept. 30, Equal to $1.79 a Share 


Charles Y. Pres man, chairman| 
of the Commonwealth Edison 
Company of Chicago, reported yes- 
terday that the company had a 
consolidated net income of $22,- 
714,062 in the year to Sept. 30. 
This was equal to $1.79 a share on| 
the company’s outstanding capital 
stock and compared with a net of| 

21,972,364, or $1.73 a capital} 
share, in the year ended Sept. 30, 
1943. 

Gross revenues of the system for| 
the twelve months rose to $187,-| 
236,826 from $178,312,972 in the 
year to Sept. 30, 1943. 

For the first nine months of this 
year consolidated net income to- 
taled $16,542,629, or $1.30 a capital 
share, compared with $16,221,566 
or $1.28 a share, in the nine 
months to Sept 30, 1943. 


OTHER UTILITY EARNINGS 


Iowa-Illinois Gas and Electric Com- 
pany—Twelve months to Sept. 
30: Net income after charges, 
$2,310,456, against $2,882,724 in 
the twelve months to Sept. 30, 
1943. 


Third Avenue Transit Corporation 
—Three months to Sept. 30: Net 
income after all charges, $65,713, 
compared with $326,646 in the 
three months to Sept. 30, 1943. 


UNITED CORPORATION 
UPHOLDS NEW PLAN 


PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 
The United Corporation filed to- 
day with the Securities and Ex- 
change Commission a brief sup- 
porting proposed modifications to 
its amended plan for an exchange 
of securities. 

The plan called for the distri-| 
bution of 1.8 common shares of 
the Philadelphia Electric Com- 
pany and $5 cash to be paid in 
exchange for each of 1,123,37: 
shares of United’s $3 cumulative 
preference stock One change 
would increase the cash amount 
to $6 a share 

The Admiral Corporation, Chi 
cago, manufacturer of radios, filed 
today with the SEC a registration 
statement covering 216,000 shares 
of $1 per value capital stock to be 
offered by Dempsey & Co., Chi- 
cago. Proceeds from 150,000 shares 
of the stock will be added to work- 
ing capital, the prospectus said, 
while 66,000 shares now owned by 
officers of the company will be 
sold for their benefit. 

The Public Service Company of 
New Hampshire, a subsidiary of 
the New England Public Service 
Company, Augusta, Me., asked the 
commission today to approve the 
sale of its gas business to James 
A. Pierce of Hartford, Conn., for 
$350,000. Mr. Pierce would buy 
the gas properties for an unnamed 
New Hampshire corporation. 


BOND GROUP TO BACK 
SEABOARD REVAMPING 


Committees representing owners 
of twelve issues of bonds of the 
Seaboard Air Line Railway Com- 
pany announced yesterday that 


31 (P— 


they will give official notice today |? 


of the adoption and approval of the 
plan of reorganization. They will 
notify holders that bonds not with- 
drawn from deposit with them by}; 
Dec. 1 will be bound by the terms| 
of the plan. The securities depos-| 
ited with the several committees) 
ranged from 15.42 per cent to 91.20 
per cent of the amounts outstand- 
ing. 

The reorganization committee of 
the Seaboard has made an applica- 
tion to the New York Stock Ex- 
change to list the certificates of| 
deposit to be issued by it for issues 
of bonds now traded on the Ex- 
change. 

Under the plan, all the first 
mortgage bonds of the Tampa 
Northern Railroad Co! mpeny must 
be purchased at their face amount) 
plus accrued interest. The reor- 
ganization committee announced 
that it will ask the court to in- | 
struct the receivers to carry out) 
that provision. 


|} merchant 
| would do other than regard it as a 


|mittee favored March 15, 


|}Texas P & L 


Ralph Kelly 


Ralph Kelly, president of the 
{Baldwin Locomotive Works, 
|been elected a director of the Gen- 
jeral Steel Castings Corporation, 
lwas announced yesterday by ~ Bg 
rison Hoblitzelle, sensei we 





SINGLE PRIGE RULE 
I$ SHELVED BY OP 


Continued From Page 30 
said such action was necessary “to 
get our own house in order.” 

Touching on cancellations, Mr. 
Wolf said that the view was that 
an order is a “liability” and no 
“worthy of the name” 


liability to be taken care of, if 
terms and delivery were met. On 
delivery dates, he said, his com- 
instead 
of March 31, for delivery of coats 
and suits in view of the early East- 
er, with 
men’s clothing. 

Mr. Wolf said that a series of 


post-war vertical conferences be-| 
|tween the mills, cutters-up and re-| 
|tailers were planned for the near} 


future. 

At the morning session tight 
market and supply conditions 
ready-to-wear and related acces- 
|sories fields were 
| Herman Hartmann, president, 
Arkwright, Inc.; Siegmund Bern- 
stein, Kirby, Block & Co.; 
J. Greenebaum, vice president, Fe- 
lix Lilienthal & Co., and Arthur E. 
Littman, president, Arthur E, Litt- 
man, Inc 


has} 


June 1 to 15 urged for} 


in| 


surveyed by) 


Milton | 


THE NI 


{7 HOUSING GROUPS 
DISPOSE OF NOTES 


| $29,828,000 of Securities Sold, 
$20,800,000 to Chemical 
Bank Syndicate 


| Seventeen local public housing 
| authorities sold yesterday $29,828,- 
| 000 of short-term obligations, all 
|dated Nov. 21, 1944. 

The Chemical Bank and Trust 
Company and associates purchased 
$20,800,000 of the amount offered, 
the remainder being distributed 
among other firms. 

Purchases by the Chemical Bank 
group included $11,250,000 of the 
Detroit, Mich., Housing Authority, 
‘due Nov. 27, 1945, of which $5,250,- 
000 were purchased at 0.52 per cent 
and $6,000,000 at 0.54 per cent. The 
Chemical Bank syndicate also pur- 
chased the following issues: Ches- 
eo Pa., $5,157,000, due Nov. 27, 
1945, at 0.50 per cent; Darlington 
County, N. C., $196,000, due Nov. 
it| 22 1945, at 0.55; Fayette County, 
‘| Pa,, $2,068,000, due Nov. 27, 1945, 
jat 0.50; Newport News, Va., $1,- 
aa ,000, due Nov. 27, 1945, at 0.52, 
and Orlando, Fla., $378,000, due 
| Nov. 6, 1945, at 0.54 per cent. 

Salomon Brothers & Hutzler and 
associates purchased the following 
|notes: Clackamas County, Ore., 
| $606,000, due Feb. 26, 1946, at 0.52 
| per cent; Detroit, Mich., $1,000,000, 
due Nov. 27, 1945, at 0. 52: Fayette- 
ville, N. C., $369,000, due Feb. 26 
1946, at 0.56; Kern County, Calif., 
$430,000, due Nov. 27, 1945, at 0.54; 
|Little Rock, Ark., $980,000, due 
Feb. 5, 1946, at 0.52; Madison 
County, Ill., $571,000, due Nov. 27, 
1945, at 0.50; Memphis, Tenn., 
$1,000,000, due Nov. 27, 1945, at 
|0.50; Richmond, Calif., $683,000, 
\due Feb. 26, 1946, at 0.52; Wash- 
ington County, Pa., $800,000, due 
Feb. 5, 1946, at 0.52, and Winne- 
bago County, Il, $841,000, due 
| Feb. 5, 1946, at 0.52 per cent. 
| Harriman Ripley & Co., Inc., 
purchased $458,000 of the Mem- 
|phis, Tenn., housing notes at 0.49 
per cent, and $410,000 
Island County, IIL, notes, due Nov. 
6, 1945, at 0.49 per cent. 





|Jersey City bought $880,000 of 
|Corpus Christie, Tex., notes, due 
Nov. 27, 1945, at 0.52 per cent. 


Joplin, Mo. 


Halsey, Stuart & Co., Inc., re- 
ceived the award yesterday of 
$250,000 city of Joplin, Mo., re- 





funding municipal airport bonds on| 


la bid of 100.126 for 1%s. The 
bonds, due Nov. 1, 1949 to 1964, 
‘were reoffered at prices to —_ 


of Rock| 


The Bessemer Trust Company of | 


N 


Riverside Drive Houses 
Acquired by Investors 


Sales of two apartment build- 
ings on Riverside Drive to in- 
vestors were reported yester- 
day. The fourteen-story build- 
ing at 370 Riverside Drive, at 
the northeast corner of 109th 
Street, was bought by an invest- 
ing client of Carl Blank, lawyer, 
from the S. K. Management 
Corporation, Samuel Knepper, 
president. The property, as- 
sessed at $650,000, contains sev- 
enty-two suites. Joseph R. Rol- 
nick was the broker, and Home 
Title Guaranty Company in- 
sured the title. 

M. J. Belmont sold for the 
Union Dime Savings Bank the 
seven-story house at 194 River- 
side Drive, corner of Ninety> 
second Street, subject to a ten- 
year first mortgage of $177,500. 
The plot measures 113 by 125 
feet. 


from 0.80 to 1.30 per cent, accord- 
ing to maturity. 


Mutual Life Insurance Offering 


The Mutual Life Insurance Com- 
pany offered yesterday for sale 
from its portfolio thirty-two lots 
of various State and municipal 
bonds in the aggregate amount of 
$9,030,000. It awarded to various 
bidders thirty-one lots, totaling 
$8,530,000, and rejected the bids 
received on one lot. 


CAN MAKE ‘SECOND’ LOANS 


Banks Get Approval Under ‘GI’ 
Realty Financing Plan 


WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 (Pi— 
National banks can make “second 
loans” on real estate to veterans 
without violating the Federal Re- 
serve Act. A Treasury ruling said 
the action was designed to help the 
5,000 national banks take a larger 
part in lending money to veterans 
to buy or build homes under the 
Serviceman’s Readjustment Act 
(G. I. Bill of Rights) of 1944. 

The Federal Reserve Act pro- 
hibits a national bank from mak- 
ing real estate loan on property 
|put up as securtty for a previous 
loan; but Preston Delano, Comp- 
troller of the Currency, said that 
when such second loans are*guar- 
anteed by the Veterans Adminis- 
tration, in accordance with the 
G. I. Bill, they will not be consid- 
ered real estate loans within the 
meaning of the Federal Reserve 
Act. 

The reason, he said, is that the 
|bank’s primary security is the loan 
| guarantee certificate issued by the 
Veterans Administration. Under 
|the G. I. bill second loans may not 
be more than 
spenenane eee or cost of a home. 





OVER-THE- COUNTER SECURITIES 


ae ESDAY, OCTOBER 31, 1944— Sources of these unofficial quotations given upon request. hte 41 -SUITE APARTMENT 


B 
NEW YORK 


Pre 
Bid Asked. Bi 4 
24% 255 24% Guaranty 
441 453. 440 


65 


1 
i4 


+7 


Bank of Manh 
Bank of N Y¥ 

Bank of Yktr 

Bankers 
B 
Brooklyn (4 
nt Hanov 


Irving 4 60« 


Kings Co 
1.40 4 

Lawyers (1 

Ma 

-|Manufactur 

Merchants 


nx Co 


104% 
39%, 
419% 


Nat 
37% \."* 


ef 
ct 41% 
51% 
1G 


” 


AS 
Chemica rgan (J 


Penn Exch 
Public (1% 
Sterling 

Title Guar 
Trade (60c) 


50% 
22% 
54% 
83 
28% 30% 
, 840 880 
1685 1725 
180 200 


N. Y. CITY BONDS 
Bid.Asked 

139 140% 
134 135% Aet 
131% 133% 4 
131 


591 
02% 


79 


840 
1685 
180 


h Ave 
t Nat 
ton (6 


U S Trust 
th cludes 


$80 


1979 C& 


1971 


1 
15 


Dec a 
Dec na 
a Life 
situral 
Allian 


Casualty 
Equitable 
m Insurance (t60c), 
n Reinsurance (2 
Reserve 


1981 
15, 1978 
1977 
1976 
1974 
15, 
1966 
1964 


March 1 
Nov 
Jan., 
Feb 


25 Surety 
ss, June 
s, April 
April 
Marc! 


2% | Baltimore 
Bank & os 
Boston (12 


1972..... 


City of 
Conn Gen 

Cont Casua 
Federal (1 
Fire Assn 


"iremen's 


en's Fund 
franklin (1 


eneral Re 
braltar F 
Falls 
& 


Fi 


eld basis 
1950-54 1.60 


. STATE BONDS 
1.05 0.95\™! 
0.85 0.75), nal 
1.15 1.05 Nat onal 4 
110 1.00 ional Ur 
130 1.20|8 ar 

0:40 Ve Amst 


Ma yland ¢ 
; \ Bondl 
ry hants 


e 25; 1960 


New 
New 
New Y 


rth River 


theasterr 


rthern 
Pac ific, Fir 
. Pacific 
4 33% 135% | Phoen t 
1964 A. 
9 


~~ Pi 
J & J 56- reg 9 ; : , 
PUBLIC UTILITIES surance 


: D 
116% 120% 


114% 

pf 110% 113% 

pr pti By) 67 " 
t 1 2 115%) s; 
124 
\, 112% 
12 0% 


Alabama Po 
111% 1 F 
1 
fiel ld 
LA 
er 
JS Fid & 
J S Fire 
U S Guara 
Westchester 
tIncludes 
ared in 1 


Guar 
oe 


3 33% 
107% 110% 
55% 594 
70% 73? 
2 pf(al.25) 18% 
35% 
e Line (a36c) 105 


) 


Alabama 


Southe 
Cc cc 
Cleveland 
Ft W & Ja 
Detroit Hill 
Ga RR & 


52 
99 


» 
® 
® 
S pr In $6pf ‘a3 

1g PS pr In$7pf(a3%4)105 
rleans P S (1.40 27% 30% 
t $4 pr pf. 70% 73% 
pf (a5.25) 82% 85% 
pf 108% 113 
§ pf 114% 119% 
Okla Gas & E) pf (7 126 130% 
Pacific Pow & Lt pe (7) .108% 112 
Penn Edison pf (5 77% 81% 
Penn P & L pf (7) . 107% 110% 
Phila Co cum pf (5 9514 99 
‘lainfield Un W (3.20 60 63 
Publi Service (Col) (145) 27 281, 
Rochester G&E 6% pf 107! 4 110% 
Rochester Tel (80c) 14a 15% | 
116% 120% 


pf (7) 

of 56% 59% 
part units 

a67c 16 17 

West Texas Util pf (6). 110% 114%) 

aPaid or declared in 1944 


Lack R R 


IN Y 
N Y 
Northern C 
Iswego & 
Pitt Ft W 
Rens & Sa 


& Har 


Unit N J 
Utica Chen 
Vicks Sh & 
Vicks Sh & 
Warren (*3 

“Payment 
tlement of 


Utah 
Wash 


P& L 
R&E 





calculated on 
for 


The subjoined quotations, 
all 


percentage basis, are average prices 
maturities 
Name 

tch T& S F 
Atl Coast Line 
Balt & Ohio 
Balt & Ohio 
Cent of Ga Ry 
: *hesapeake & Ohio 
sapeake & Ohio ‘44-52 15,1%,2%,3 
& North West.’44-45 444 
& North West.'44-52 1%,2,2%,2% 
Chi Burl & Quincy.’44-48 149,24% 

Chi Mil & St Paul.’44-45 445 

Bess & Lake Erie. .'44-51 1,24%,2% 
Boston & Maine '44- 3 
Canadian National. .’44-45 44,5 
Canadian Pacific. ..’44-45 4% 

Ch Mil St P & Pac,'44-53 244,244,344,3% 


Bid. Ask 
5 1.60 1.40 


mere Fates 
44-52 V4, re 2%,2% 
"44- 522 2 % 
44-44 
"44-51 y% 
"44-52 4 
"44-45 444 


Ya.244 


Chi 
Chi 


SSSSSSERsaEy 
susssinas’ 


ee re 


A 


($80 


nufacturers (2 


nal Safety (fl 
New York (3% 


antee es 1 
Underwriters 
INSU RANCE 


(71.80) 


Amer (130c) 


ie Camden Fire 
New York 


Rey 
t Amerk 


& Mfr 


Brunswick 
Hampshire 
rk Fire 


Inde 


Paul 


Seab ar rd Surety (1 


944 


& StL pf 
& Pitts 


Ill Cent Leased Lines (4) 63 
Morris & a (3.88) 

Lack & w 
Syra 


|St Louls Br Ist pf (6) 
R R & Ca(10).265 


Prev 
Bid Asked Bid 
12) .. ..320% 328% 322 
144% 154% 144% Cent Penn National 33) 
; n ied Corn Exchange 
1605 1655 1605 Fidelity Phila 
First National 
8 38! 
ots t1'4 , § | “Germantown 
1% SI% A Girard 
51% 534 51% | Land 
60 180 160 | Market ational.5 
266 -"%7 Nat Bk Germ antown 5 
31 
104%, 


BI 


ers pri? 
(8 1 
P) (6 


Title 
Gt 
156 


North Philadelphia 
Northern 

101 a. < for Ins 
hiladelphi 

18 Provident : 

43% Real Estate Trust 
53 | Tradesmens 

10% *Ex dividend 


27 27 
1001, 
18 


4448 


(80c 
16%, 
56 
0! 11% 
21% 24% 21% 
95 100 95 | Cont Il B & Tr 
1415 1460 1429 | First, National 
Northern Trust. 


+ 


(4 98 
$70 
extras 


405 


Bid Asked 

132% 14044/Am Cyan 5% 
. 50 52%\Am Dist Tel 
. 38% 


S (5) pf (50c) 
. NJ (5 
FOAM seen 

TE%G) . cones 74 

e (f1.2 : 24 
60c 
1) 


Am 
Am 


Hardware 
Maize (1 


(t1%) 


17% |Art Metals Cons (al%) 
Coca-Cola Bt 
Columbia Bak (a2.25) 
Col Bak cum pf (13.25) 
6% Crowell Collier (12.25) 
79% 41, | Dentists Supply (?4) 

605 639 |Pictaphoge Co (a75c) 


. 4 /Dixon (J 
++ 20% 22%) |\Draper Corp (3) 
. 18 Dumont Lab A 
55 


. 42 
. 48% 
61% 
11% 


554 

19 

6014 
™ 


57%, 


ou 
ippers (4) 
21) 

(1) e 
(1) 
(1.20).. 
(1.20) 


2 


57 
444. 


5 
4a 

51% | F jundation C 
6544 | Gar 


Life 

Ity 

40 
t2%4 


NJ 


East Sugar Assoc 
a25c) 
ock Packing (2) 
(a75e 
(a60c). 

; on & Knight 
Graton & Knight pf ( 
Great Am Indus (a30c) 
45% Great Lakes S § (alts) 
9 |Great Paper (1.60) 
29% | Harrisburg Steel (1.20) 
27, |Hooker Elec Chem (1.6 
10344 | Hooker 
444, | Hoover 
20% | Jonas 


(40) 
(3 


insurance 
& M il 


Nor 
re { 


Co (1.40) 
& Naum (ad0c) 
King Seeley (afOc) 
O1'4 | Kre ; Hi) pf (60c) 
0% \Landers F & Clark (1) 
5’4| Lawrence Port Cement 
Maguire Indust (b30c) 
Mallory .PR) Co (al) 
sing Rockwell (a3) 
: 1) 


asualty 
ng th 
Fire (?2 


(40c) 

re (2 ‘ 

berty (?30c) 

tion Fire (5) .168 

Casualty (1) 25% 
14 


Yi 5% pf 
Merck & Co 444% pt 
‘©. |National Casket (a1.25) 
ey National Casket 7 pf 
27% 04, New Britain Mach (2% 
124 17\4/Ohio Match (al) 
12 a mutit (ad5c) 
, *etrol Heat & Pw (b25 
grit | Pollak Mfg (a50c) 
981 Remington Arms (b30c 
BOM Safety Car H&L (a3 
90% | Savannah Sugar (2 


in 
6 


tl '80) 
80¢ 


5 
m (72.35) 


I 2% 86%! Scovill Mtg (2 


cident (fl 
Wash (1.40 

Co (aTtec). 
alias (1.20) 
Fire (1,20) 2 
(t2 


a | Singer Mfg (t10%) 
*iStaley (AE) Mfg (a50c 
By, Standard Screw (1.20) 
234; | Stanley Works (al'4) 
71a |Struthers Wells (a75c) 
47%, | Superior T & D (40c) 
» 35% \oy¥ivania Indust (T1%%4) 
D126 Taylor WI & S (a90c 
37%|Time Inc (144) 
5 Trico Prod (2%) 
37%| Triumph Expl (a20c) 
49%,| United Artists Thea 
73%,|United Drill T A (60c) 
32%,|United Drill T B (40c) 
de. Veeder Root (2) 
Warner Swasey 
Warren Bros B 
Warren Bros C (a5S0c) 
yyy G1 [wick Spencer Steel 
2 16742/ Wilcox & Gibbs (al) 
35\4| tIncludes extras 
2 1174s\clared in 1944 
4345 | div 
97 
8144 
66 


&e M 


40) 
F&M 
cecident 
16 
Guar (fi 
ntee 
rire 
extras 


(74.75) .120% 
(2%) 3M 


"3 iM 
404, 
684, 
30%, 

or 


50) 


(1.60 
(71.60 
aPaid 
(a20c) 
(2%) 
anteed Stocks 6 
Vicks (6) 


rm 


(3.50) 93 
ck pf (5.50) 
8s & So (4) 
Bank (7) 


Principal and interest 

61 | United States funds: 

145 Province 
Alberta 
Alberta 

Brit Columbia 
Brit Columbia 
Manitoba 
Manitoba 
New Brunswick 
Nova Scotia 
Ontario 
Ontario 
Ontario 

Quebec 

» | Quebec 

Saskatchewan 

| Saskatchewan 
Interest rate 

leffective Jan. 1, 1936 


N J 


5 


5 


(*4 


*5) 76% 801, 4 
(4) 104 108 

(4.50) 37 

& C pf (7)..186 
ratoga (4.65) T 


entral 
5 


4 


5 
53 4 
74% 


& Susq (6) 
Pac (5) 
Pac pf (5) 76\, 
50 22 
withheld pending 
tax controversy 


5 


Na Maturities. Rates 
\Chi Rock Isl & Pac.'44-50 2,2%.2% 
}Clinchfield RR Co. .'44-52 1%,2% 
| Del Lack & West "44-49 4 
|Denv & Rio Gr W.'44-542.3,3% 
Erie Railroad "44-45 44 

| Erie Railroad i 51 155.1% 

| Fruit Growers Exp.. 

|Grand Trunk West.’ 

Great North Ry 

Illinois Central 

Kan City Southern.’ 

——- & New Eng. 

Lehigh & New Eng.’ 

Long Island 

|Louisiana & Ark 

Louisv & Nashv 

Merch Despatch ... 

Missouri Pacific ° 

Nash Chat dé St L.’44-52 24 


Bid. Ask. 
65 
50] 


n 


zx 
oy 


Dew 
S838 
s3eHONS 
eooovs 


ausssssnss: 


1 
1 
1. 
1 
1. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 1. 
1. 
1. 
1. 
1. 
1 
1. 
1 
1 


DDD Ret at et tt tt et Be 





SSSRRSRSSRSRE 


PHILADELPHIA 


CHICAGO 


615 


INDUSTRIALS 


39%,/Am Dist Tel N J 5% pf 


12%,/Arden Farms vtec (a50c 


15% | Buckeye Steel Cas (a75c) 
NY (a1.50) 7 


Crucible(a2.25) 4 


}Dun d& Bradstreet (144) " 


’|East Sug Assoc pf (a2) 


(al 90) 


Elec Chem §$4.25pf 


(al) 
a 


aPaid or 
bPaid in 1943 


Canadian Bonds 


Rate.Date.Bid.Asked | 

4% 1956 82 
1955 83 
1954 113 
444 195. 
195 
434 1960 106 
1960 114 
4% 1952 10544 
1966 11213 114% 
4% 1951 110 
1960 123 
1958 106 
4% 1956 109 
4% 1960 84 
1959 90 
reduced one-half.|So Jersey Gas-El 5s, 


@ ow 
eus 


ANKS AND TRUST COMPANIES 


OUT-OF-TOWN 
NEWARK 


Bid.Asked.Bid 
| Federal 18 19 18 
Fidelity 41 42% 41 
Lincoln Nat (new). 364 3844 364 
“|Merchants } wy 37 
7%| National New Essex.138 143 138 
National State Bk. 675 675 
United States ‘4 44 
|West Side 26 26 
BOSTON 
I 
$29 
534, 


Prev 
d. Asked. Bid 
% 41% 38% 


First Natl 
Merchants Nat 
Nat Rockland 
Nat Shawmut 
Second Nat! 
State St Tr 
U S Trust 1 

U S Trust pf 17% 
Webster and Atlas.. 58% 


SAN FRANCISCO 


‘Bank Am NTS 52% 50 


56% 
344 
5815 


53% 


% 101% 
283 


98L, 
278 
405 | 
615 


, INVESTING 

Bid Asked.| Bid Asked 
1l% 11%/Assoc Std Oll 6% 6% 
109 iCorp Tr AA imod) 2.81 

109 111 (Corp Tr accum (mod) 2.81 
347% 36% Diversified Trust C 3.80 
22% 25%)| Diversified Trust D 5.65 6.4 

) 8% 9% Fundamental Tr Sh 4.91 3.67 
28% 30%| |Independence Tr Sh 2.30 *2.59 
Nation-Wide Sec B 

18% 19%8/No Am Bond Tr ctfs 

76 |Super Corp Am AA 

4 Jselps 

so" | Uselps B 


49 


Shares 


A 


Management 
|Aeronautical Sec 
: j Affiliated Fund 
32% |Amerex Holding : 
5444,;Amer Business Shares 
“| Amer Foreign Invest 14.19 15.39 
7% Axe Houghton Fund Inc.14.75 15.86 
Axe Houghton Fund B. .28.41 30.55 
Bankers National Inv 5g ote 
Bond Inv Tr Amer 102.28 107.5 
|Boston Furad 17.87 19 22 | 
4,|Broad Street Inv . -29.87 32.29 
j 9 14 Bullock Fund 15.88 17.40 
6 |Canadian Fund 3.25 3.85 
11%/Century Shares 29.21 31.41 
97 |Chemical Fund 9.71 10.51 
4% Commonwealth 5.03 5.47 
42| Delaware Fund 18.34 19.83 
,| Dividend Shares 1.28 1.40 
r4 Eaton & Howe Bal Fund.22.33 23.98 
24 Fidelity Fund 19.60 21.11 
102 | First Mutual 547 6.12 
33% Fundamental 22.97 25.14 
4 |General Capital 4.40 36.99 
16% j (general Investors 5.00 6.03 
}Group Securities 
Aviation Shares 
Rallroad Shares 
4 Steel Shares 
2%, Incorporated 
69 |iInst Aviation Group 
34%, | Inst Bank Group 
120 — Insurance Group 
u y,|Inst Stk & Bond 
4 110% Investors Fund Cc 
Keystone Cus 
Keystone Cus 
‘ Keystone “us 
‘4 Keystone Cus 
+. |Kevstone Cus 
"5 Keystone Cus 
3% | Knickerbocker Fund 
91% | Loomis-Sayles 24 Fund 
37%| Manhattan Bond Sh 
3544 |Maryland Fund 
280 *| Massachusetts Investors 
ny Mass Investors 24 Fund 
Mutual Invest Fund Inc 
|Nation-Wide Vot Shares 
5638! National Inv Md 
| National Securities 
| Income Shares 
Low Price Bond Shares. 6 
New England Fund 13 
N Y Stock, Inc 
Automobile 6! 
Rallroad 5.57 
Steel 6.28 
Petrol and Trading 15 
Plymouth Fund : 
|Putnam (Geo) Fund “4 
3 


}Quarterly Income 
Stevens & Clark 
9: 


a” 


7) 
Invest 


0} 
Trust 
Invest 


764 
4.16 
4.80 
24.06 
*12.20 
1.00 
117 
13.37 


4) 


Invest 


118 
108 
*25 
1034, 

31", 


et 


I4whe 


K1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
$2 
S4 


19.64 
29.68 
20.52 
10.52 


T) 


~ 


~ 
Je on- 
au. 


Cc 
).28 
6.54 
57 41.40 
10.09 
5.86 


+ 


2 


) 


11.81 
12.33 
1.47 
8.69 


5.28 
7.58 
14.02 


no 
> SK onue 


M4 
) 


Republic Invest Fund 
~ | Scudder 
Fund 
|Selected Am Shares 
Standard Utilities 
State St Inv (new) 
Trusteed Indust Shares 
Union Bond Fund B 
;}Union Bond Fund C 
| Wellington Fund 
Investment Bankers 
84 |Biair & Co 
85 |First Boston Corp. 
1144%4/ Huron Holding 
lll *Ex dividenc 


10344) 

107 | Utility Bonds 

rd |Assoc G & E 4s, °78, inc. 32% 34% 
|Gone El & G A 6s, '62.. 98% 101% 
El Paso El 3%4s, ‘70 108% 109% 

112 |Gas & Lt Bergen 5s,'49.114 

125 |Hudson Co Gas 5s, ‘49..115 

107% | Jersey City H P 4s, ‘49.103 104% 

111 |Phila Trans 3s, 6s, 2039 70 73 

87 |Pub Svc Coord Trans ref 

93 | 4s, 1990 1 


45 


71 52 23.53 
8.29 9.06 





payable in) 


: 3% 
35% 36% 
30 4 
3 109 
7 102 


|United El N J 4s, 49....110 111 


> 
al 


Name Maturities. Rates. 
New York Central ‘44-45 44% 
New York Central ‘44-53 15.2.2 
N ¥ Chi & St L...°44-51 1%,2 

N Y NH & Hart "44-46 £7) 

N Y NH & Hart ‘44-52 2%,3 
Northern. Pacific. "44-51 1%, 2,244,2% 
IN W Refrig Line | .*44-50 244,34 
Pennsylvania R R .'44-58 i2'3 2%% 
|Pere Marquette . "44-52 2,244,2% 
|Reading Co "44-45 4% 

Southern Pacific ..'44-56 244.2% 
Southern Railway .'44-53 1%,2 

St L San Francisco.'44-45 444 

St L Southwestern. 

|Texas & Pacific... 

|} Union Pacific 

|Western Maryland 

Western Fruit Exp.’44-45 44. yy 

|} Wheeling & L Erie.’44-51 1,14,2% 


M% 





RSVRSSSRussssRsenas> 
5 mG mG FS PLP BE Be ew EPS LN I we 
shaasssasbaabaaaass: 


ttt Det Od eS BS ND DD aS 


EW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, 


20 per cent of the) 


13.43 | 


14.00 | 


23.74 | 


17.13 18.70 | 


NOVEMBER 1, 


WEST END AVENUE 
ATTRAGTS BUYERS 


Properties at 74th and 88th 
Street Corners Involved in 
Day’s Active Trading 


An investing client of L. V. 
Hoffman & Co., brokers, bought 
the thirteen-story apartment build- 
ing at 575 West End Avenue, 
southwest corner of Eighty-eighth 
Street, for cash above a first mort- 
gage of $384,000 held by the Met- 
ropolitan Life Insurance Company. 
The seller was Albert Klein, who 
recently acquired the property 
from the Metropolitan Life Insur- 
ance Company. 

The assessed valuation is $615,- 
000 and the building, which occu- 
pies a plot 100 by 100 feet, is re- 
ported fully occupied, with an an- 
nual rent roll of about $76,000. 
There are fifty-two apartments. 
Max Olesker was attorney for the 
seller and David Kugel for the 
buyer. 

Samuel Reznick, operator, bought 
from the Metropolitan Life the fif- 
teen-story house at 290 West End 
Avenue, corner of Seventy-fourth 
Street, opposite the Schwab man- 
'sion. The building is on a plot 120 
by 100 feet and consists of sixty- 
two suites containing 394 rooms. 

The property is reported to have 
an annual rent roll of about $123,- 
000 and the sale was made subject 
to a first mortgage of $618,000. 
A. Robinson was the broker and 
Natanson, Pack & Scholer were at- 
torneys for the buyer. 

Simon Brothers bought the for- 
mer Anderson Galleries Building at 
the southeast corner of Park Ave- 
nue and Fifty-ninth Street, 125.5 
by 95 feet, from the Central Sav- 
ings Bank through John J. Reyn- 
olds, broker, and the new owners 
were reported to be conducting 
lease negotiations with a _ well- 
known organization of composers 
and publishers. Eight years ago 
the corner was acquired by the Co- 
lumbia Broadcasting System inter- 
ests as the site for a proposed new 
broadcasting building, but on ac- 
count of war restrictions the plan 
finally was abandoned. The build- 
ing has been vacant for several 
years. 

The Charles F. Noyes Company 
acted as brokers in the recent sale 
of the former United States Rub- 
ber Company Building at 1790 
Broadway, southeast corner of 
Fifty-eighth Street, to Richard M. 
Lederer, realty investor. The 
twenty-story building occupies a 
—j|plot 108 by 126 feet and contains 
about 200,000 square feet of floor 
space. 


SOLD AT FLEETWOOD 


The five-story garden-type apart- 
iment at 1470 Midland Avenue, 
lin the Fleetwood section of Yon- 
|kers, was sold by Kristen Kristen- 


’| son, as trustee, to the R. & G. Re- 


lalty Corporation.*The property con- 
tains forty-one apartments and is 
assessed at $200,000. Myron L. 
‘Blum Company and Samuel Orlof- 


.|sky were the brokers. 


| David S. Meister, after a brief 
jownership, has sold the two-story 
‘corner building at 296-304 Hugue- 
not Street, New Rochelle, to an in- 
vestor. The property contains eight 
stores and eight apartments and 
is assessed at $81,950. Samuel Or- 
lofsky was the broker. 

Pease & Elliman, Inc., as agents 
for the Eastern. Baptist Theologi- 
ical Seminary, sold the two-family 
,|house at 42-44 Croton Avenue, 
;| Hastings-on-Hudson, to Mrs. Mary 
Ann M. Repetti of Washington, 
D. C. 

The New York Life Insurance 
Company sold the eight-room Colo- 
nial home at 958 Post Road, Scars- 
dale, to Gustave J. Fuerst. George 
W. Abner and the Raymond R. 
Beatty Organization negotiated 
the deal. 

Dwellings in White Plains have 
been sold through William J. Sher- 
ry for Charlotte Dunne to J. A. 
Caldwell at 79 Smith Avenue and 





Dunne at 18 Summitt Avenue. The 
same broker sold the house at 119 
Maryton Road, Greenburgh, for the 
Home Owners Loan Corporation to 
Edward Hirsch 


ARMY SELLS 83 BUILDINGS 


Surplus Structures in This Area 
Bring About $10,000 


Sale of Army barracks and other 
military buildings and installations 
on leased property in the New 
York area, recently classified as 
“surplus,” brought in about $10,- 
000, with many farmers and other 
\individuals listed among successful 
bidders on eighty-three structures 
jin Brooklyn, Long Island and New 
Jersey, the division engineer, North 
Atlantic Division, Cerps of Engi- 
neers, reported yesterday. 

Col. Albert H. Burton, division 
engineer, expressed gratification 
at the wide response to the notice 
of sale, and said bids in a further 
sale of similar holdings would be 
opened in his office at 270 Broad- 
way on Nov. 9. 


ones, 000 Loan Is Recorded 


Squibb Building at Fifth Avenue 
and Fifty-eighth Street, made by 





the Metropolitan Life Insurance 
Company to the Jones Estate Cor- 
poration, John N. Staples, presi- 
dent, was recorded yesterday. 


BUSINESS LEASES 


Master Made Patterns, Inc, dress designing 
and sale of women’s apparel, store and second 
floor in 783 Madison Ave—Payson McL. Merrill 
Co. brokers 

Wellesley Modes. Inc. office. showroom and 
stockroom, in entire third floor of Horn & 
Hardart Building at southeast corner of 8th 
Ave and 47th St—Tankoos, Smith & Co, 
brokers 

Eggers’ & Higgins. executive offices in 25 
Broad St; Arthur T. Bernstein, export busi- 
ness, in 5¢ Broad St: August Hartkorn, scien- 
tific investigations, in 170 Broadway: Victor 
V. Martelli, architect. in 56 Beaver St—Brown, 
Wheelock, Harris. Stevens, Inc, brokers. 

France Neckwear Co. store for sale of men's 
ties, through Walter Salmon, in 200 W 48th 
St: Jane Gilbert. interior decorator, in 806 
Madison Ave: Delma Shoes, Inc, in 46 W_ 57th 
St: Wolf Landsman Corp, dry cleaning, in 25 
E 67th St—William A. White & Sons, brokers. 

Plymouth Rock Poultry Farms, store for sale 
of poultry, through Donald MacDonald, in 2461 
Broadway; Helen Politis and Tom Regas, sea 
food restaurant, in 2656 Broadway; Saul Brum- 
mer, portrait studio. in 872 Prospect Ave, 
Bronx—L. J. Phillips & Co, brokers. 


REAL ESTATE 


APARTMENT SOLD SOLD BY CHURCH 
AT Tt PARK AVE. 


Investors Get ‘Pioneer’ House 
at Corner of 58th Street— 
Other Manhattan Deals 





The fourte 1-story apartment 
building at 471 Park Avenue, at 
the southeast corner of Fifty- 
eighth Street, one of the earliest 
“¢ooperative” residential buildings 
in that neighborhood and one of 
the early apartment houses erected 
there prior to the New York Cen- 
tral improvement and ¢lectrifica- 
tion work, has been sold through 
Douglas L. Elliman & Co.,-brokers, 
for a syndicate represented by 
Benjamin Mintz. 

The buyer is an investing group 
represented by Allin, Riggs & 
Shaughnessy as attorneys. Title 
will be insured by the Title Guar- 
antee and Trust Company. The! 
assessed value of the property is 
$1,030,000. 

This property was acquired by 
the Hearst interests in 1924, when 
it ceased to be a cooperative. It 
was sold by them a few months 
ago to Frederick Brown, who re- 
sold it to the present sellers, who 
now have effected the third sale/Brown through William A. White 
of the building within a year. The|g@ Sons, brokers. 
fifty-family house was built in/_— 
1908 and has a frontage of 120.5 
feet on Park Avenue and 92 feet 
on Fifty-eighth Street. 

The six-story apartment house 
at 527-35 West 157th Street, 100 
by 99.11 feet, has been sold by 
Wilton Associates, represented by 
Goodman & Mabel, to George E. 
a ——— by sen M. | 

eiffin, lawyer, for cash above a : 
meastanme of S4ta5it, Gemma i: Hotel property in Trenton, N. J., 
Ross was the broker and title was |@8 been sold by Robert R. Meyer, 


insured by the Title Guarantee and |presidentsof the Meyer Hotel chain, 
Trust Company. to Albert W. Stender, owner of the 


Peru Realty Corporation pur-|Park Hotel in Plainfield, N. J., and 
chased from Pre-Fabricated, Inc.,|Otto H. Waechter, general super- 
the apartment property at 508|visor of plants for the Ruberoid 
West 166th Street, 125 by 103.6;Company of America. 
feet, assessed at $225,000. Samuel The sale of the corporation was 
Slater was the broker and City|handled by the David Jaret Com- 
Title Insurance Company insured| pany of Brooklyn. The well-known 
the title. hostelry contains 250 rooms and 

The Celona Realty Corporation,|250 baths. 
represented by Joseph Howard| Mr. Stender is president and 
Katz, lawyer, sold to Surf Apart-|Mr. Waechter is treasurer of the 
ments, Inc., the six-story apart-|new corporation, which takes over 


Hy * . 
_Peivate home at 56 Park Avenue, 
formerly occupied as the residence 


has been purchased by Frederick 


STACY TRENT HOTEL 








The Stacy Trent Hotel Corpora- 
tion, which operates and has a 
long-term lease on the Stacy Trent 


ment house at 838-44 Riverside|operation of the hotel today. Wal-| 


Drive, at 158th Street, assessed at/ter Osterstock will remain as man-'! 
$165000. The irregular plot meas-|ager, according to the new owners. 
ures 102 by 151 feet and there are}; Robert G. Morrison has pur- 
forty-five apartments in the build-|chased the former home of John 
ing. P. Zaccaro Company acted|U. Light on Grandview 
as brokers and Norman Kemper|Nerth Caldwell, adjoining the 
represented the purchaser. Mme. Schumann-Heink place. The 


The Zaccaro firm also acted as|sale was made through the Van} 





Byrde 
Corp, 130 





for Mrs. John Digney to Charlotte | 





|nished penthouse apartment in 2 


|'Beekman PI; 
A $4,250,000 mortgage loan for | Deane, in 109 E 


\twenty years at 4 per cent on the| 


Silva 


mtg 


($9.90) 
Bernstein 
Inc, 551 


23.9x100 
Inc, 4539 


91 Second Ave Corp 
to 93 Second Ave 


s 


to 
mtg 
wy 
pres 
mtg 


71.10x100 
Stony 


se 


James 
to 
mts 


Ruth John 
J., to Aaron 
$62,033 
25x100; 306 
pres), to 


St 


Bway, 306. n e cor Duane St 
Bway, Inc (Benjamin Schlechter 
Freymin Realty Corp, 51 Chambers 
mtge, $70,325 ($16.50) 

} Lith St. 206 E, + w s, 36x95; Philip E 
lin, referee to Free Magyar 
Church of New York, 206 E lith St 
$13,000 (foreclosure): $#14.40) 

we Broadway, 343, e s, 25x50 

corp (Nathan Gelfman, v pres 
West roadway Corp, 343 West 
($5.50) 

Amiterdam Ave, 71, 26.9x75: Emigrant In- 
dustrial Savings Bank to S. V. Realty Corp 
239 W 72 St: p m mtge. $8,500 ($12.10) 

52 E, 19x75.5; 52 E 120th St Corp 

Levin, pres) to Emfred Realty Co 
1475 Bway: ($8.25). 

214 W, 


McL. Merrill Company, broker. 72d St, 25x102.2; Union Dime Savings 
Bank to Arrow Holding Corp, 


Charles L. Skelley, Miss Helena; (45) 18 E Alst St; 
Bliss, John S. Paige, Miss Carolyn West End Ave, 575, ¢ w cor 88th St. 1006x100: | 
James, Mrs. Marie A. L. Rowse, in| gna ave Corp, 270 Bway, mtge $384,000 | 
14 E 72d St—M. Morgenthau-| (5649) 

Seixas Company, brokers. 


BRONX MORTGAGES FILED 


to Gert Holding Corp, 9 E 45th St; ($165) 
Same property: Gert Holding Corp (Milton F 
Hill, pres) to Gerdelii Real Estate Corp, 235 
Madison. Ave: mtge, $120,000; (50c) 
2d Ave, 1444-46, e s, 50x100; Meyer Feder to 
Mandel Shop, 1444 2d Ave; mtges (4 int) 
Webster Ave, 1534 to 1536 (11-2896); John} 100th St, 307-309 E, nm s, 40x100: Lawyers 
Koran to Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank: 
extends mtgs to April 7, 1949, at 4% per 
cent; $25,855. 
Webster Ave, 1530 to 1532 (11-2896): John 
Koran to Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank; 
7, 1949, at 4% per! 


Mortgage Corp, trustee, to Beamos Realty 
extends mtgs to April 7, 
Rupet Holding 


Corp, 1710 Park Ave; cons $375; ($55) 
cent; $28,340. 
2314 (11-3102); 
Corp to Annuity Fund Congregational Min- 


Manhattan Ave, 44, 25x100; Hildel Realty Corp | 
(Alfred A. Kalfin, pres) to Alfred A. Kaifin, 
Crotona Ave, 
isters, 287 4th Ave: extends mtg to Oct 5, 
1954, at 4% per cent: $91,500. 


1307 Clay Ave: mtg $6.965 (55c) 
100. 11x} 
3d Ave, 298 to 2560 (9-2314); Molmor Realty 

Corp to Equitable Life Assurance society 
393 7th .Ave: extends mtg to Dec 1, 194 
at 5% per cent; $12,429. 

Tremont Ave, 928 E (11-2992); 1950 Daly 
Corp to U S Trust Co; extends mtg to 
Sept 1, 1949, at 4 per cent; $175,000. 

Union Ave (10-2678), n e cor 163d St; $813 
E St Corp to North Side Savings 
Bank: installments at 4% per cent; $20,000 
Watson Ave (14-3716), s e cor Ward Ave; 
Ward Holding Corp to Metropolitan Life 
Insurance Co, 1 Madison Ave; aa mtg 
to Jan 1, 1955, at 4% per cent; 


139 Spring 
to 43 
Broadway 


brokers in the sale of the private|Ness Corporation. 

house at 269 Madison Street in the; William R. Davis has sold his 

first change of ownership for this|home at 10 Mitchell Place, Glen! 

lower East Side holding since 1867.|Ridge, to Charles M. Close. Simp- 

The sale was for “all cash. “ son-Merritt Company was the! 
broker in the transaction. 

FORMS NEW COMPANY T. Frank Valleau sold his ten! 
jand one-half-acre farm at Tinton 

TO MARKET HOUSING ¥ 21s to Mrs. Mildred Canfield of} 

East Orange. Ray H. Stillman, 
a a? broker in this transaction, 

Organization of the Precision-|ported the sale of a twelve-acre 
Built Homes Corporation to pro-|farm at Chapel Hill, Middletown 
mote home sales and construction|Township, by Edward Wright of 
was announced yesterday by | Jersey City to John M,. Olsen of 
F. Vaux Wilson Jr., president, who| Red Bank. 
also is vice president of the 
Homasote Company. MAN 

Griffith S. Clark and George L. HATTAN TRANSFERS 
Apple Jr. are vice presidents Of | washington St, 201, 25.2x62.10xirreg 
the new company, E. L. Simmons Sent + oa aw 
is treasurer, John A. Heinrich is Manhattan Ave, 124, 17x70; Feliciano R 

to innie D. Hylton 241 W 142d St 
secretary and J. F. Barrett is} 000: p> m mts $2500 1$4 95, ® 
chairman of the board. The au- 1sth St. 73-75 E, 50x99.11; Nils Lundberg to 

. . . y 
thorized capital is $1,000,000. SS Se 

: 3 107th St, 156 E, 28.3"100.11: Job Giordano te 

It is financed largely by con-|}7th St. 0 Fee 11; John Giordano to 

tractors, dealers in building sup- Second Ave. 750-54, 49.4x100: Lena 

to red F. French Investi : 
plies and others engaged in vari-| sf, ‘Ave: ‘mtg $11062 saa 
ous branches of the housing indus- Henry St. 206 s w cor of Clinton St 

nnie ‘ o 257 t 
try and will merchandise houses| Seaford Ave Br: to 257 —= 
. : .| 24th St 37-39 W, 41.8x98.9: Martki I 
directly and license contractor (Leonard Bennett, pres) to Leonard Bennett, | 
builders who will set up fabricat- ocr 26th, St. and ‘ano. (55¢) 
: . : st St, 457 W. 150x991 Alaur Realty Co 
ing plans in major centers to (Meyer Ginsburg pres) to iaever Giacbeon, 
“service department and furniture re * Marke Ave, Brooklyn (quitclaim) 

527 9g Wilton Asso- 
store customers.” . The idea will] ciates. inc Joseph. Chinich pres). _ 
be to sell complete, ready-to-oc-| F, Movoy, 137 North Rd, White Plains, N Y 
cupy homes. ligth St. 132 W. 19x100: Rebecca Smith to 

P : mimarg ealty Corp, 132 W 118th St 

The company will merchandise) amsterdam Ave. 1463, 2411x100: Irma E. Fos- 
homes through the export market) [ter to the Bowery Savings Bank: mtg $13,545 
to operative builders, realty men,|2d Ave, 91: 243x100 
insurance companies, institutions Geery, _Pagenert. — 
and industrial concerns for em-| Broadway. 1936. s e cor of 65th St, 26.2x100x 

irreg:; Besson Cohen to Criterion Real ty Corp 
ployes, and through department} 38 w 4sth st: mtg. cons, $2,500 ($2.75) 
and furniture stores such as R. H. |“ 5e yitcer,' 1490 McCoombe fat (half int 
Macy & Co. of New York, L. Bam- > a. oo = 75x98.9: Harr¥ Gretske t 
7 andoiph Trac Co 25 Broad t : 
berger & Co. of Newark, Jordan, $28, 425" ($36 a5). "Same. sreperty: Randolph 
Marsh & Co. of Boston; Barker) frading Corp (Robert M. Gluck, pres) to 
arry aplan, 37 Morr Ave. & srop 
Brothers of Los Angeles, Lit erty: Harry Kaplan to ; " = Same Corp 
Brothers of Philadelphia, Kauf-|,,}) Chambers St (520.39) eg: the Wendell 
man's of Pittsburgh and Frederick] 4 Evans Company (Fred W. Evans. pres) to 
Evwood, Ine 125A 12th St, Brooklyn 
& Nelson of Seattle, 60th St, 44 KE, 39x66.2; Emma midt to 
Brookfield Construction Corp, 521 Sth Ave 
mtg $16,745; p m mtg $8,000 ($17 0F 
; j " 10ist St, 124 W, 25x100 11; Frank Gelb to R 

Zachry Rejoins Elliman Co » FE. Realty Corp 114 W WO0lst St ‘mts 

Greer Zachry, until recently on Fa I Dm mis $2 900 $5 50 ' 

: _ 4th St, 47 4 ! Edr Tt 
active duty with the Navy as @/‘to‘rritz Harris, 9 W 107th St. 
lieutenant commander, has joined) /,'59.90).. s+ 719-18, 307x080 6xirreg: C 
the Douglas L. Elliman Company} Realty Corp (Campvell O'Reilly, pres) 
in its commercial and investment) Smigiant Ry ae wank 
department. Formerly connected) 26th st 903 | n 8. 28.6x98 9xirreg 

; : 6 Priendlich 
with the Elliman organization for| (pW eihinn son” Boot at 
several years, Mr. Zachry for Sizer (St 30) ss peeent 

. . oO co 1 ’ 
seven years prior to his naval serv- Cornelia K. Livermore to Harry Lieber, 
: : ‘ ‘oint Rd, Stony Point Y_ ($2.75 
ice was vice president of the Fred Sth Ave, 2208 25x110: Finans Karolen and ano 
F. French: Management Comparry| exrs & trustees George Karole, to Willnights 
and a director of the Fred F.| Realty corp, 2208 Sth Ave; pm mtg $5,000 
» - 8. ‘. ‘ 40) 
llth Ave 450. 248x100 Estat f 
French Investing Company. Rozell, Inc (Anne G Campbell 7 
T RENTA Gerace Nealty Corp, 588 Greenwich St 
937 ($15.40) 
APARTMEN LS La Salle St. 126, 463x100 .11xIirreg 
son, 1060 Broad St. Newark, N 
Samuelson, 115 E 89th St; mtge, 

Chester F. Sharp, ‘president of 
C. F. Sharp & Co. of San Francisco, 

Calif., in 737 Park Ave; Gilbert G. 
Bundy, in 33 W 67th St; Rose-| 
Marie Bourdillon, in 320 E 53d St;| 
Eric Virgin, in 22 E 60th St— 
William A, White & Sons, brokers. 

Mrs. Emily Earl Borsalino, fur- 


Mrs. Margaret G. 
73d St—Payson 





Riverside Drive, 308. s e cor of 103d St. 
y Metropolitan Life Insurance Co to Car- 
Management Corp, 274 Madison Ave 
($440) 
122d St, 203 W. 20x100.11: 
(J. Morton Gordon, pres) to Irene Shea 
W 126th St. and ano: mtg $9.250 ($3.30 
100th St. 215 W. 60.5x51.10 
Corp (Hyman W. Okum. pres) 
Realty Corp. 215 W 100th St 


($2.75). 

BS4th St. 268 W. s s. 26.4x102.2; 268 W 84 St 
Corp (Pauline Jacobs. pres) to Josmen Realty 
Corp, 206 W 83d St: mtg $40,977.56; p m 
mtg $18,000 ($12.10) 

Norfolk St. 107. 25x100; Isidor Lax to 
A.. en 222 £ Broadway: mtg $12,500) 


ith Si, 504 E. 6 s. 25x103.3: Dry Dock Savings | 
$100,000. Institution to Anthony Guirdanella, 435 E| 
Clay Ave (11-2887), e s, 1,047 ft n of 169th St: 14th St, and ano ($1.35). 
Reisol Realty Corp to Metropolitan Life In- {Amounts in parentheses revenue 
surance Co, adison Ave: extends mtgistamps on deed, 
to June 1, 1949, at 4% per cent; $32,000. grantor’s equity above mortgages.) 
7 


101 


to Josmen 





show 


of the rector of Trinity Church, | 


UNDER NEW CONTROL | 


Place, | 


also re-| 


2215 Madison Ave | 
| 


to George | 


Don- | 
Reformed | 
cons 


Harlem Realty Corp} 


A W O Realty! 
mtg $56,000) 


Joseph | 


each $1.10 Indicating $1,000) 


BROADWAY CORNER 
IN NEW OWNERSHIP 


Brown Sells 17-Story Show- 
room and Office Structure 
at Sixty-first Street 


The cote wheel 


jand office building at 


way, northeast corner 

first Street, has been sold 

erick Brown to a client of ‘ 

& Smith, lawyers, with Britz Reai- 
ty Company acting as brokers anc 
Joshua Bernstein represent the 
seller. Title was the 
Title Guarantee and Trust mm 
pany. 


ing 
Dv 


a1) 4 
insured 


116.2 feet on Broad: way andc rs 
a plot of about 6,400 square ‘feat. 
It is reported fully occupied 
firms in the automobile and 
trades and accessory lines 
sessed valuation is $605,000. 
annual rental is reported 
about $105,000. 

The five-story apartr 
ing at 256 West Eighty-fifth Street 
has been acquired by Benjamin 
|Greenfield from Louis Bafzer 
| through Russell H Hines and Wail- 
jter Goetzel, brokers sare 
brokers leased the 27 
West Ejighty-ninth 
client for Mrs. Mary Gi 

The Dry Dock Savin 
ition sold the five-story : 
|78 West 102d Street to a clie: 
R. Solove, broker. 

The Silrhode Realty Corporation 
sold the five-story house at 313 
West 100th Street, assessed 4% 
$22,000, to a client of the Ww cod, 
Dolson Company. 

The four-story converted dwel- 
ing at 257 West Fifty-fifth Street 
lhas been resold by a client of 
David L. Charal, lawyer, to an 
vesting client of Harry M. Bardez 
|for cash above a new ten-year 
|mortgage of $12,000 taken by. ine 
| Ministers and Missionaries Benefit 
| Board of the Northern Baptist 
ememagpenren 


+ 


eee 


ent 


The 
house at 
Street ft 


a 


hirile 
UUls 


“.~ 


PLAN BUILDING WORK 
IN FIFTH AVE. AREA 


A twelve-story department store 
jand office building will be erected 
at 589-91 Fifth Avenue and 3 East 


| 


Forty-seventh Street und pl 
filed yesterday by Walker a 
jlette, architects, for the estat 
|\Robert W. Goelet. The estimat 
cost is $1,300,000 

This and other proje 
yesterday brought the 
cost of building work filed iz 
hattan in recent months, i 
|pation of stricter zoning 
tions and for other reasons 
more than $125,000,000. Plans 
ifiled since June 1 for aperue 
buildings alone involv $5 
000,000 and for offi , 
buildings more than 
|Many of these plans are never ¢x- 
pected to materialize 
| Also filed yesterday 
Department of Housing a: 
ings was a plan f 
japartment house 
first Street to cost 
jand to contain twent 
|\Harry M. Prince filed the pl 
behalf of Theodore Backer 

About $50,000 will : 
lalter the private house at 7-9 Hast 
'Sixty- eighth Street into an apart 
ment house for fifteen families 
Miss Susan Bliss was listed 
owner and Newton P. Bevin 
| architect. 

Changes costing $48 
j}made in Empire State 
|space leased to Time In : 
ing to Harrison ilh 
| Abramowitz, architects, an 
| $40,000 will be spent by the 
gregation of Brothers f Shearith 
Israel to add three stories and 
proof its building at 99 Centre! 
Park West, from plans Alber 
Goldhammer. 

As part of the New York Cea- 
jtral West Side 
‘the fourth and floors of 
ibuilding at 40 Tenth A aod 
1453 West Thirteenth Street will be 
|demolished at a cost of about $35 - 
000, according to plans by John F 
|Gallagher, architect. 
| Saks-Fifth Avenue 
|500 roof improvement adj 
jemployes cafeteria atop 
jing at Fifth Avenue a 
iStreet, from plans 
i\Schoen, and Robert G 
spend $22,500 to « 
ness building at 606 
inue and 2-7 West 
Street into a single 
|plans by Walker & Gille 


TRANSFERS IN THE BRONX 


| Whittier 


er 


regu 


} East 
it $1 


e 


‘ 


al 


am 


a 
yrii¥ 


he 


de 


as 
as t 


00 will 


Builk 
Buil 
a 
Fo 
¢ 


3s ao 
D 


. 
« 
Che 


Sry 


hy 
bY 





verment? n! 
hal 


impr ar 
v ~ 

fifth #7 

a4i bd 


venue 


plans $i2- 
44 nine +. 
ts & 
Firt 


rye Wy 


an 


slet 


Archer | 
mtg $9,177 } 


Inan | 


rl! 


Portland H. 
ton, Mass 
239t) St, 642 
Savings and IL 
1991 Dawson St ($9 
Jackson Ave 2446 
Edward Venables to 
Forrest Ave ($3 30 
|Corlear Ave 3029-3031 
Linehan to Anna Carre 
Ave ' $2 400 $4 4 
154th St, 379 E (9-2401 
Rechten 
10 


an 


1é4th St 
Stebbins Ave 
sito to Romeo Sarr 
Elisworth Ave (18 S47 
‘ Josep E ¢ tantir 
756 Ellsworth A e 
(17-5092). e s 
C. Tenety to 
Decatur Ave $A 60 
Riverdale Ave, 4570 
and Trust Co 
95 Park Terr 
Rowland St (15-3 
Ave Joseph Div 
radi 
1634 St 10-2678). n 
Side Savings Bank 
| 948 Prospect Ave 
[Amounts tn parentheses s 
lon deeds. each $1.10 indicatin 
equity above _mortgages 


MANHATTAN MORTGAGES 


25th St, 553-57 W: Randolph Trading Corp 
tion ‘(Robert M. Gluck, pres) to Harry Grets® 
610 West End Ave utge 
$28,625; instal, 5% 

Sth Ave, 53-55. n « 

| tion (Jacob M. K 
Mutua! Life Insur 

St, Boston. Mass 

|Sth Ave, 745-753 

Jones Estate Corp 
Metropolitan Life I 

4 $4,250,000 

| S7th St, 41 W; Gert Ho 
Hill. pres) to Chase Nati 
10 yrs, 3%: $120,000 

724 St. 214 W: Arrow Ho! 

Rosenthal, pres to 
Bank; p m mtg. due as 5 

55th St. 257 W: Herman Schwart 

| and Missionaries Benefit Be ard 
ern Baptist C nm. 152 
pm mtg. 10 

79th St, 102-108 
(Sorrel R. Winer, pres 

| 82d St, Jackson i. ghts 
2 yrs, 6%: $24,7 

Riverside Drive. 308 s ¢ cor 

Management Corp (Paul S$. ! 
Metropolitan Life Insurance Co 

3 & 4%: $352,500 

186th St, 114-116 W: Stuyvesant 
(Carrie Northshield. pres) ¢ 
40-16 82d St, Jackson Heights 
$13,200, 


Nivelle Corpere 





| 


fing 


per bond 


| 
Mac abe 

> Edna ¢ 
prior 
192 «© 
BHttlin 


| yrs, 





¢ a —-—— —-. 7 . 
NOV. 1, 1944 REAL ESTATE AT AUCTION apartments for Exchange Country Board __Help Wanted Female—Agoncies | Help Wanted Female—Agencies (waucnsn. 


% L THE NEW YORK TIMES, 
REAL rant AT_ AUCTION — WILL exchange 3\4-rm N Y apt, conven-| MOTHER and 2 children, ages 814 and 514, »N rAVE nt 
lent to Army-Navy, business centers, for} wish board and lodging on farm; om me Service Two Locks BELOW WALT ST — a + e 
| ‘ 
| 
}* 





3-4-5 rm Philadelphia apt. MA 4-4579. muting distance from N ¥ C; references 50 CHURCH ST DAILY OPPORTUNITIE USES 
3 ) ~ 


BANK SELLS BUILDING | , ‘ 
——_—__—— to live ROOM modern apartment, unfurnished,/¢xchanged. X2759 Times K Hudson Terminal Buildin JR STENOGRAPHERS, gd future $25 
eas 


Slebiinsh Ave. Preperty Con-| for 4 or 5-room apt in Bklyn or Man- ~ Board Wanted STENOE EWS 8:30-6 P M. SECRETARY-STENO, export 


vattan SH 8-9100 


|APARTMENTS EXCHANGED—Manhatian. 


Cashicr-cle 


—— s r SECY-STENO <PR. personne 
Up in the Bronx s | ELDERLY Jewish lady (no kosher cooking)| SECY-STENO: College graduate, tech- TYPIST-CASHIER, pay ft bills” ‘$35 —— 
tains Store and 3 Apartments) APARTMENT LOCATING BUREAU, desires room, board; private family; nical background, Radio City.......$50|SPANISH-ENGLISH steno Help Wanted—Female 
fii Nannie. \ Oo ve | 315 Bway (84 St TR 7-7500 86th-110th, West Side. Good home and) sTENOS: LEGAL: MANY ... to $40/SECRETARY-STENO, brokerage 
5 STORY & BASEMENT | 4 « © BOTANKC Gardens, Bkiyn, 5 rooms, un- service adequately paid for RE_9-4008. STENOS (2). export exper . $40/SWITCHBOARD oper-typist, bkge Cashier, front office, NOR 
The Brooklyn Savings Bank | f 4 W 100 St area. X26a2|/STUDENT and wife, room & board near] STENO: Railway (2), trans $35|ADDRESSOGRAPH OPERATOR ; 
- 4 : : : : brit - Columbia University; private family, $35) STENOS (2), brokerage; will train. ..$35|/TELETYPE Cashiers, full-part 
has sold the four-story store 24 FAMILY BRICK 64 acre estate at Basking Ridge adj. Bernardsville, N. J. axe HANGE” spacious wntarnished 3, mod-|"* 50288 Times : __ =STENOS—$30 REMINGTON-RAND BILLER, #21 ma I 
| . A beitdine fer 4 TR 2 7990. JEWISH working mother desires nice,| Radio City Grand Central PAYROLL clerk, commercial $35) Cashier 

and three-family building at APARTMENT Spanish bungalow type hollow tile residence. 13 rooms, 4 Ape — gos _ Manhatt congenial home for daughter 3 years and Downtown | Uptown COMPTOMETER OPERS. 5-day nen 

" : : } » _ > » . . - ariments niurnisne anhattaniseif, V967 Times Downtown tnes—Some 5-day CAGE CLERK, brokerage exp 0 =e 1 
299 Flatbush Avenue, Brook baths; guest cottage; superintendent's house; barn; garage. iments of Gua Yor Le ROOM and board for elderly German Iady|, BEGINNERS STENOS $23-$28]IBM key punch Cashiers 

: i : levator ho X2610 Ti x4 SEPERS LEGAL STENO 

lyn, to Kazar Boyajian. P. A. 2011 Lafontaine Ave. [S87 ST. 166 E. Iia-room “apt; today a elevator Sow mes.—_____| MANY: Full charge BKKPRS: Some|ELLIOTT-FISHER BKKPR. bkge ; 
: ore } - | 0-6:30 P M. Brough Help Wanted Female—Agencie with typing or steno; large & small|DICTAPHONE OPER, excellent firm ‘ 
Bogossian was the broker. | nr. Municipal Bldg. so u e WASHINGTON HEIGHTS (Castle Village) ALL-AMERICAN SERVICE | _ offices to S4OITYPIST. switchboard’ onerate A a ge 
uise C. Ahearn sold the! Steam heat—coal fired hed verlooking river:|2 WEST 43 ST ROOM 601 eet BERraS l-~& typing to $90) UNDER WOOD BOOKKEEPER ok ; 
ulse ° 1 soi l . at—co: . saiiall n , rent $100: tenant ist buy carpetiz diCLERICAL SUPV. to 35. hvy exp, ; NE OPERATORS MOON-H #7800 P & S bkge $40) Chambermaids 
| (Subject to owner's approval witbin 5 days) leurtair $1,400 M547 Times ee SECY to exec, organ =D — 5 All type office machine operators; some|SECY-STENOS, 5-day ——y 
5-da Top Salaries|FILE CLERKS 25- $30) Chambermaids 


two-story dwell ing at 2337 Plot 37.6x100 - . Apartment: Th F Five STENO, advtg, Sd, 42 St -day 
Eightyfifth Street to Vincenzo} Thursda No Sth { SATURDAY, NOV. 11th, 2:30 on Premises jarn ea } Ne uk our, Five Rooms) ire CLERK’ 12 mid-8 A M, 6 da MISCELLANEOUS STENOS (5), excellent firms 124, Vanderbilt 
oo Se was mace a tie FARM MACHINERY AND LIVESTOCK TO BE OFFERED SEPAR apt! steam heat; reasonable Tental. [COMET OPR-PAYROLL CLIC, mdtn. tae) a a eae ubllanine tte SOLEYPISTS Nr ee Chambermaids 
— 414101 G. - : . e) StCain ca easor ne enta ano . =} 4 . ’ ‘ ) ’ € 
. | ° * JR ACCT, internal, 5d, mdtn - rms and publishing to $0/TYPISTS (6) d — jp ; 

through Slomka Brothers, Inc..,| at 2:30P.M.in Concourse | ATELY 108th, 235 W. Elevator apt, 4 large rooms,/INVOICE CHECKER, bkpg bkgd 5| MONITOR BD OPER: typist 35| MAIL CLK, mach opers, excel oppty ao _ 
who placed a new first-mort front, telephone: modern improvements.|MOT PIC CLK. typ, knidg steno, 5 da.$35| ORDER CLERK: TYPIST: Uptown...$35|MARGIN P & S CH typists Open] Chambermaids 
4 vs u : usu s a € ‘. Ls 


Plaza Hotel, Bronx : 
gy Sy 2 , ; | Apartments of Six Rooms & Over |ELL FISHER BKPR, 5d, midtn $34] TEMPORARY CLERK: typing $35|STENOGRAPHER, beginner P l. 44 

gage loan on the property with Fred Berger, Auctioneer Send for $20-$25| Chambermaids 
; Choice corner apartment: 11 rooms, 4|RELIEF SWBD-TYPIST, ‘ 


Chrysler Bldg. 5TH AVE. 60'S NITE WORKERS, 5-i2 mid. inexp, 64..$33] ORDER CLERK: Foods: Hrs 10-7 PM.$35|PAGE GIRLS & messengers 
Sav } 5d, midtn.. .$130 PROOPREADERS (2), C.P.A. exper.. .$32|}BEGINNERS, excellent opportunities .. $25|Hotel | 
the South Brooklyn Savings||| Send or Call for Leaflet & Terms descriptive New York City lbaths, 3 or 4 bedrooms sublease to Sept} YPISTS, 5 day, 42 St 4 st ro . cope a7 es Hotels and Restaurants Chambermaid-bathm 
~ > £ ra) i 130, 1945. or longs PAYROLL CLERK, 5d, mdtn 4 FE . 23-$ “MILES : ; ; ; 5 ff i pa 
and Loan Association. ina, Phone LE. 2-5000 [BI jf); Or eee as st uu 21100 |COMPT OPERS, 5-day wk st $130] TELEPHONE OPRS: Plug & monitor [purchasing sett ae catenin’ tag cottire|Chambermaids 
ENOS. sevi, 5d, midtn " $30 board: some with typing $23-$30) shop, Al exp (Conn $4 20K 


Fred Berger & Co booklet 
£ . | Stephen A. McDonald, Auctioneer Apartments—Bronx STATISTICAL TYPIST. advtg. 5d : WOMEN: to ‘age. 60; ‘simple clerical Shop: Al exp (Conn)... ...$4.200| pay. llotel Alexan: 
, ' 


200 W. 34th St.,N.Y. LA, 4-4072 1% Furnished LEVISION & SECY, intg, some OT...$: clan: Tittle tokas ‘ées as Payroll clerks & typists $31-$ 
— - aa00 | - t igs. 5 yrs exp >< J Soke EC ES, ‘ . is } < roo checke cashie ’ 
iCTION BY AUCTION MANHATTAN REAL ESTATE (3 ee furnished apartment for couple, JOBS IN RADIO CITY RECEPTIONIST: typing; 5-day $23 ones. p all — , — 540| Lnambermaides 
eae ——_— i— ; » gs yy ®t ne oetee iS. JR SECY, some 5d anoS gay Fy — CONTINUATION| Mat! & info clks. typists 
BANK BOOK No 5599, the Manhattan REAL ESTATE WANTED r Pe 47 p— —47 pics ar ty > . a se 4 é or aller G'TYPISTS, several, fine firm 25 Oe Ss .G 8: Some After School Jobs 
FILE CLERK-TYP, 1 yr exp $115) TRIAD Help Wanted—Nurses’ Registries 


DITTO TRAINEES, sevi. 5d, 6, exp.to $110 SRSONN ATTENTION—NURSES ( hambermaAids 


Savings Bank. Payment : ped. Finder} —— — 
: aes < i bem one mage ANUFACTURERS INVESTO RS Sportnente—Svouiye as INNER, STENOS, 56 8 , ° 
5 IEG L NINE, a) » o¢ . P< oO Tac cles "leas 
RANK BOOK No. 112418, the ee York MAN BRO NX-BKLYN “aa Furnished IR FILE CLERKS, 5d, some exp as ue 44 Ll West 42d PRANK, PETTIN. 101 We ST "9 rH Chambermaids 
Savings Bank -ayment stopped ease = | ros pec > SGINNERS PAGES, « § 7- : : ' , 
forgo bank | : | TAKE YOUR PICK! Pealent nieltortscd: rae ratte eee One C60B HORS RDNA MAB, KING a 
ry ient ne wrhood: 2-3 roc refrig M¢ LG FEMALE DEPARTMENT MANAGER Clinic, others Relief. private. $10 iC hambermaids A 





T 
I 
E 
L. 





ms 


n: $60 lease. BU_ 2-1110 FILE CLKS, many, some 5d $115 SIMI SALES promot (to dentists) exp plus $3,000] Wt SES “any grade. Call today. work io-| 
‘ 


retu k 
BLACK cloth bag, 40 St 5 Av, 5 P M, Sun,| or L | CITY ey cratic ; " 
i | : “ | WE ARE OFFERING A SELECTED LIST OF THREE, exquisitely furnished, twin beds;|PASHION STENO, ~" at @ ail st $26) FASHION artists, black white wash $55 morrow. Paramount, 100 W 43d Chambermaid wait 


RE 4 i] 
maid, 2 mes, Steinway, radio. Vic-|ADVTG CLKS. 5d figs $25) JEWELRY sales vii 


et conts » } 

Bi ACK x Feather x. t containing bendis,) { to 4 Story Bidg. LOFT BUILDINGS trola. vacuum immediately PR 4-0505 BOOKKEEP: ING CLES. beginners. 5d a HOSTESS, attr, poise meals&$35 Help Wanted—Female |Chambermaid asi 
So area, Saturday night; reward. BAl| HEAVY FLOOR LOAD MANUF'G ’ Unfurnished BEGINNE RST BEGINNERS!!! seo; a... — Is ed meals & = Accountant's asst, post-war opty: young.|Hot , 
pana PRICED RIGHT! BORO PARK. 3-5 rooms, private house; |RADIO, MOT PICTS, ADVTG to SECTY to Edtl Dit, 5-day. $35| interested in bkkpg. RE 2-1724 | Chambermaids 
BROWN LE ATHER PURSE, containing| 15,000 to 45,000 Sq. Ft. . steam; subways. WI 6-8845 MACKEY SERVICE 7 SECTY, vici 63 St E' wad *** "335 Accountant, junior or semi-senior, by| We 

mportant pai lost Sunday in Yellow Most of the properties require relatively large cash investments above small SCHOLES ST, 254-56. Light 4-5 rooms; |55 W 42d ROOM 223/STENO, newspaper office. 5-day......$35| CPA: permanent. CO 7-2336 \Chambermaids 
ead, Grend tral area; reward. Hart M & L | Ist mortgages. This will insure permanent ownership of the prop- reasonable. EV 8-2872 BKPR, FC, accts receivable, 5d.......S175|STENO, Gr Central, 5-day $33) Accountant, student for CPA; bkkpe exp: | wa 
ford 7-394 ect erty, and yet show you a minimum of 20% return on money invested. Ap rtments—Queens & Lon Tsiai @|BKPR, take charge; 5th Av -»+» SOOISTENO. advertising, Al co...........$30}€00d oppty. State qual. K89 Times Chemical tech 
BROWN square case, containing Leica Inquire For Our Circular BROKERS PROTECTED e slan@inkpr. F C, Bronx; opportunity .....335]BOOKKEEPER clerk,  5- $30| Accountants, perm staff C PA firm: state|research la 

amera s. in Hotel Pennsyivar FORE Furnished BKPR afmall ofiice, © GAP. «6. ones $39 TYPIST, good at figs seeeves $35] @duc, exp, salary. P1083 Times Downtn. | Chemisis. major 
irreplaceable f i | ’ ST HILLS t rooms, nice -|RECEPT, ass »kpE yp. monite TYPIST, dictaphone opr seoweeees 35 - . 
Mitchell. ME Inc DWIGHT, VOORHIS & HELMSLEY, INC. nished; suitable couple. Broker 7 ae BKPRS, assts, with-w'out typ, 5d..$25-$40| rypistT’ publ 9 antonn arebieeian i tee tgonerat), war werk. Mr ' 

. Bivd. BO 8-5440 STENO, begnr, $30; expd, $35 (low Bklyn)|rypIsT, learn teletype a a hemist research 


BROWN Ww. Al Li 1 identification, money | 907 B H. K. Wei Queens 
roadway Algonquin » K eiss tl... ~ 35 i 
vewar ‘ t § klyr | : LONG BEACH, 1 ° 575 STENO, assist public sten, Sth Av “ITYPIST. swhd relief eeeeeee " nit 
at 20th Street 42700 |) 44 East 23 St., N. Y. AL. 4-1100 ONG BEACH Tudor Towers, 215 E Bway |S tENO. knowl Catholicism: 5 day... --S35Ip F 'BKPRY s-day” week aftemp._pt-time. Sabatini, 49 Junius, BRIYT China dece 
. | ~ Pang room apts withicreNO. legal, advig, sales promotion $35/SWRD oPR. typist. Al co "rrr" $2g/Adjustment clerks, expd; 5 days; pleasant 


HANDBAG containing jewelry and moncy , 
r eiet ‘ t a . _ - kitchenettes & bathro 4 facing oce ega - . 
REAL ESTATE tht) 3 . reasonable OFA frentala’ ease ~~. STEN®. knowledge bkpg, Bronx 1SWBD OPR. 5-day week : $27| Working conditions. WA 99-1200, Ext 4  |¢toaners 
1 Call N Y¥ office. Al 1480 I ng Beact rYPIST, stencil cutter, Radio ¢ $30-8 35 ADDRESSOGRAPH opr, 5-day 30) Advig mer, large specialty shop, outside) «+ od 
2100 : ‘TRECEPT, typist; salon 5 day $25/ COMPTOMETER opr. 6 mo exp $29] Boston; interest fashions nec. X2646 1 Cleas 


STRUCTURAL STEEL A t ts Wanted t Y * = 4 = with-w = Mont yoy ~ - CLERK, gd handwriting, 5-day $25 Advig all’round, copy layout, yng, sea-|, 
urd , . _— or > + Sel . . . rim tr P ypis answer phone (« >) CLERK airline ‘eity) $23 | sonec perm, executive oppty. M54 I ‘ . 
turned intact ' —— ut Miscellaneous !RON Work \ AC A N I APAR I MENT HOUSE FOR SALE pa -— anre rYPISTS, many, some 5d $25-$30-$35 . aC CURATE 1s EB 41 ST Aircraft; dimplers Gaus drillers, nights ~ 
ineen \ pusmeened MATURED person, lin agcy personnel..290/r aw SECYS & stenos...........$40-35-30|General Bronze, 43-02 “St, Lic. |, 
: TT 7 BR TR T ,? I< . “E ; : si y 5d. lower Bklyn 35/e Saw ee ee - leaning 
HANDBAG, black suede, containing money, SHERRY & : } 7R ION ) Jj ISHED SU : x IST AY TO RIVERSIDE CLK yme typing i ) SIGECY-STENO, engrg, techi $2,600] Admitting clerk> hosplial! eae. 8 A Acs 
ration t | SUITABLE FOR ALTERATIO TO FURN {EI UITES Furnished apartment wanted, 1 to 14/LEDGER, stock clks. or gd fig, ‘Meals $83 SECY-STENO, exec constr dept $40-45|/P M Sydenham lean. 565 Manhattar AY} 4 jeri i 


kevs i 
rooms, $60 to $500; will buy furniture jCASHIERS, rest; others SECY, records, engrg firm S35] Admitting _elerk-receptionist hospital 


i miei - H | iiaicitins wintin - . HAROLD C. SAMUELS CLKS., typist clks; many: 5 day 2-S35ISTENO, fine appear, radio £30 ; 3 - 
Si rT Ast “with nitials E. E. G., in ab, Tue. 70 WEST 95th STREET .. . 20x100 five-story and 19 E 56 St PL 3- 5923 |SKETC HES, pen & ink (mdse ‘nh = STENO Sevens att, 5-d st $28 ayers. ; ote 9 4 M 5 161 B » Ss Clerical. be 
—— a i} : . 3D-116TH ~— ~——SMA CLE’ 3/COMPTS, many, rapid adv 35 TYPISTS. fine appear, 5-d...... s30jateration hand, steady; hours 9:30-5:30; pleasa 
Tou PEL, im Sox; in a ee x Affording you the advantages basement. Steam heat and hot water. Assessed, FURNISHED-U we uw—:,_ RECEPT, hat checker, expd, beg. .Mis+$25|rypisT- BILLER 5-4 “"*"" “Ovt4s28 gar week good pay. Lustig, 165 W 58th. | ¢-fii) 
P. M.. Monday 2, seware . : EARLE & CALH IN 2-1277 ; KATHARINE B. WHITE TYPIST. stencil (3 weeks)........day $6jAlteration hands & fitters; better dresses; Z 
found phone | 3078 of more than $22,500. Have priority alteration certificate. Care- Two ¢ ary saslonen en EN ee 55 W 424 ROOM 721 TYPISTS, clericals “ape ” $36 5-da wk; good sal. JE 8-9477 a 
WALLE r interested return of papers, have : >, gp eh BH pe = “4 OF! ART dir, fashions, advtg agcy exp.$100 |BKPRS, FC & assts to $35|Artist, expd, paint novelties; able do pro-|ca). snog sn, 
ae oe reward. ie 30 years of experience taker will show any time. PRICE: $11,000. Any term lense. Mary crate mum 380.) COPYWRITER, lg exp., adv agcy ‘Open |CLERK-typist, sales dept. radio $20/duction work: gd pay. Rm 73, 2067 Bway | 80 Pay, ® 
rnstein, 154 87th | | ~ ’ . wey ye <PRS ) $40 |CLERK, typist, ; te 30 Ser eee 
712-714 E. 136th St. - BRONX Ext 580, before 6 P M or AT 9-0006 after] MFRS, maim, some o dey $35 |CLERK’ size 14, buying off, Opty... $25/ Ariat, greeting cards, highly skilled in) wiibur-t 
Jewelry Se our own broker or— BKKPR FC, 1-girl offi . buying , oppty +iboth humorous & genl design. X2613 Times 
. MEtrose S-2515-2516 vee ¥ SECTY-steno, enginrg, dntn $35 |CLERKS, expd-inexpd, excel opptys. .to $30] 4 4154 ile deal ~~ ; [Clerical workers 
BRACELET ; €eld, flexible back, turquoise _e " ANTED by Army officer and wife, sub-| SECTY-stenos, exp, mdtn-dntn $35 |PLUGBD. typist, advtg $28 Studi ~ — pag oy 4 time. Guarine) , I 
27 ast 70’s-50's: reward.| . - = > » - - a om np |} lease three, four rooms, starting Dec or] SECTY-steno, exp. legal, Sth Av $40 |COMPTOMETER opers, some 5-d.to$140mo}|* ers : — Clerical work 
nese 7 |___ MANHATTAN REAL ESTATE 1 H E N EW YORK SAVI NGS BA NK Jan 1. Four months Manhattan or Heights} SECTY-stenos, college. publ, 5-da..$130 |EDIPHONE & Dictaphone opers. to$140mo|Artist, accessories; depart store experi-|Roulevard. J , 
CHARM BRACELET, Fold, Saturday night,| ? |Brooklyn: convenient BMT. Mrs. Gould.| ‘TyPISTS, rapid, prints, 5-day...to $32 |MN HOPKINS 47200 Billing. 5-d.ovt+$35jence. Namm Store, 452 Fulton St. Bklyn. |¢jerieat assistant 
PE 6-9800, Ext 60 RECEP-typ, plugbd, engirg, 44 brs.$35 ACCURATE, 173 BWAY Artist, piece work; 5-day wk, steady em-=| eood 


ne Hollywood atre entimental } os : Tan Vf . ] , 
deine: reward. Cl 6 ext 61 |} LOFTS - SHOWROOMS - FACTORIES 8th Avenue corner 14th Street, New York 11, N. Y. MARINE officer, wife, 2 children, urgent-| STENCIL cutr, Elliott mach, per M.$10 [LAW SECY & stenos $50-45-40-35|ployment: $35-$70. GR 5-0965 at 
COCKTAIL RING, diamonds and rabies;/ FOR RENT—February 1, 1944 ly require 4 roon East Side: willing] RECEP, typ, travel bureau, pt-time $15 Secys, Stenos, Typists, Clerks, Bkprs, |Artists, colorists, production work; se to 
\ urd evening: | ign year’s lease; tops $150 month. AC 2 CLK, knowl typ, Bklyn, 5-day $35 Receptionists, Foremost Export. Ins $1 per hr: steady. Sth fl, 211 W #1 St 

. _ es Bk | , STH AVENUE-—SOUTH 34TH . 8149 APPT desk, dept store salon exp SM Com!, Bank, SS to $40 Eslists, hand poluling om tlausinca: enna Cleric 
CROSS, diamonds sapphires platinum,| 4000 sq. ft » mig. Rent $6000 P. A | Apartment Houses Offices—Manhattan & Bronx [eerrte class small furnished apartment for py NS ee YP, ~: . oes $25 =o = Seb DOYLE AGENCY - or learners. Backer. 43 W 2#t} Lith f : 
‘ +t 18 € i | VI 7-121 BWAY var 16TH winte Grand Central Plaza CASI 4 exp ote ‘ Je } Beekman St. at Nassau St, N 

. y'sq. ft.—$ A Manhattan & Bronx MAIDEN LANE, 41 (opposite Federal Re-|Raymond Schindler, VA 6-3850, | LIBRARIAN-cli, large co, dntn. $28 215 Montague St, at Court St! Bklyn sjecenes ~ g BE le 

serve Bank) Fntire 2d floor of 3,600 sql, OR " CLKS, mature, publg, 5-day $20-$22 ADDRESSOGRAPH, begs or exp, 5d...$2 scenes Art Leather 3 E17 s Cleric 





‘ \ nity g St- 


I 
U 





sreene 


y+ 
Clericals 


DIAMOND encacement ring, vicinity of 4 i ; ; 
' Rest ’ t “ finder| pace P or N : ms 
Dodes Re 5 - Ae : + ~ | J Mie . INVESTOR'S ee rents|!! $4,200 no columns: modern bullding.| " phe te tarnished: ' pueneent TYPS, rapid $30: Stat $35 BKPRS, no exp; 5 days $2 >| Artists, layout, pasteups, movie programs 
ee STORE UPPER 20°S, near BWAY. |] /|$20,232; modern vements: excellent/Premises oF Sages RE ————|and rental. Call MU_3-1950 THE PERSONNEL CO BKPRS, accts receivable, S-day $40] steady. Offset Programs, 653 U1 AV (48 St) | Cheri, 
fARk d haped, ruby|f| 50x 1 aiading Gasement SexTe ndition; bank mortgage, 10 years, 3! 15 WEST ST SINGLE man, responsible, desires it,<re 160 BROADWAY—Est 1921 EKPRS, assistants $25-$30-$35|Assembly & inspecting (Radar). Western 
BARRING, sapphire 8 ee carn t rn "$6200 P : . ; good terms. Washington 16 STORY. NEW YORK POST BLDG apartment up to $ "Call TR f-eni, SECY to Executive, 26-33 yrs. .$50-60+ CLK, knowl typ, empl pays fee, 5d...$25/Electric, 11 Av & W 54 St, daily to 4:30 
az, Wen Side Fars OVS baceiaal ? - v, nea mont Av. Wolkenberg, 371 E) attractive small offices . $35 upl7 to 9 P M , sana * 58-6911.) SECY-STENO, legal exp $45-50 CLERKS. banks & coml $25-$30-$35|Assemblers; no exp necessary. Overtime! 5 
—_— | 23RD SI near 6TH AVENUE 149th. ME 8600 DWIGHT, VOORHIS & HELMSLEY, INC WIN® > «= SECY-Steno to Vice Pres, bank $40 DICTAPHONE oper, knowl steno $35idays. L. Heller & Sons, 411 5 Av a 
IDENTIFY ATION silver link bracelet} E x 90—$1800 P. A ak Geat oh Gt. At, 4aaak ae aneene TER rental, 4-5 months; sleeping} SECY, coll grad, motion pictures. $40 | DICT OPER, bank, sh hrs with bonus.$33] Assembl ircraft t fs ehdenine Aaa 
i Einsidler, U. S. Army’’;] Matufacturing Permitte |BUILT 1936, self-service, 42 apartments, | sast 23 St, AL 4- . or 5 mises accommodations 3 women, kitchen; mid-| SECy-Stenos (2), Wall St exp...$40-45 FILE CLERKS, knowl! typing $28lexp. d ere, U rere —o pe actory|/Goldgeier A 
$eturn to mother, sentimental value; re- near way. Rent $28,000, cash $35,000,| ATTRACTIVE office space, up to 700 sq|town Ea st Sid MU 2-9003 SECY-STENOS, Jrs, publish, film, news, STENO, begnr, Boro Hail $25 Asst bukp a mo + 4 = pom gg tt 
; ~| Ass pr, young, exe oppty; 5-day, %-5,/ asst S 


|} sublease 


Clerics 


Tat! Sts eward. BU 8 


~ 7 a9 St. J : ‘ ts | 7a & 4 A year nortgage. WI] ft, 70 W 40th, 3d fl. Will divide to suit : j , Re eam’ s > ¢ - 
¥ } k Helg | Knew 1h 4 P f 8,877, S-year bank mortgage il IN FLATBUSH, 3 or 4 rooms, wife of Army law, Wall St, com'l banks $30-35 STENOS, Manhattan. Bk! $25-$35-$45 = 
LADY'S gold watch. Thursday evening, i] eo 7 ) Lar ke law library & conference room. LA| captain: sublease 6 mos to 1 year: ex ACCTG CLERKS, uptown, 5-day. $40-50 SWBD. Monitor nan typ, Biklyn: $25 $30. Marsala, 181 Chambers. CO 7-9155./Clericals. no exp 
oirds ~ per floor,|4-1443 cellent ref CL 8-187 F C BKPER, adv or publishg exp.$43-45 TELLER, bank ‘experience ° “ $3 s|Asst bookkeeper-steno; general work, re-| 
. eonitail store. AP 7-4807 Clerks, HS 


Sy © Hotel at ; —_— a * 7-story, vacant, two eights, f t Pr ryY HALL PA | $35-40 
. 62x106 ef mprovement into small/#60 SQ FT, OPPOSITE CITY HALL PARK,/4 ROOMS, Manhattan, winter season: ree| COPYRITER, fashion or patterns $35-4 TYPIST-CLK, empl pays fee, 5d 
72 St GOOD LIGHT, UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW ponsible party, excellent care for fur CLERK-TYPIST. figures oppty $35 TYPISTS . $25-$30-$35| Assistant buyer, commercial stationery,| el La 
ALL TRANSIT FACILITIES AT DOOR. |nishings. VA 6-1546: 0273 Time FILE Clerk, to 26 yrs, uptn, 5-4.$35-37 Positions Manhatn, Bronx. Bklyn, Jamaica good at figures. S. H. Moss, 36 E 23d Glesha and 


Way; reward. Tel Astrid Naley - | Principals jsuites: bargain. Nassoit, 175 W 
Sunday aft yon, taxi « nt ist AMES, CUNER, WAN & NE MAN r ly isl *R x c i CEPT ap, ( $40 S 
Ww Brooklyn & Long PREMISES, 41 PARK ROW, CO 17-3917 ONE-THREE rooms, with lease: buy fur- ee ME Ah Seat -, exp $40 POSITION ae . Sty JOOS pet, eady 3s . 
f. » 2 ‘ . Fleisig Sons, 57 E 11 St Clerks, 5-day 


LADY'S gold wrist watch, initi 
1 

and } beral reward. SA <-Foo°._|]) 315 Fifth Ave. MUrray Hill 4-2100 ||/BAY RIDGE. 6-family, 2 stores, completely KINGTON 

SANS gold wrist watch, Patek Philippe,| ‘ < med weodern: lone % st mortgage; low|441 LEXINGTON AV (44 St). Excellent) niture; bet 72d-116 Sts, west. Jeanne] >.pror : tn, Sd. $35 SECURING BUREAU. Inc. 
, ‘ bera $2000 yearl mail address. Dependable telephone serv-|Ross, 380 Riverside Drive TYPIST. adv agcy exp, uptn, 5 = 45 JOHN STREE" ; 
. ; li I) - ' . lrate >» ar y I nets $2 vo yearly *. Fama ~ & ienaneainie Raswerth. | rsi riv TYPISTS (many) $28-30-35 45 . 1? Ss" EET : Asst bookkeeper, 544 days. Batlin-Horowits,| 

Seward. M HA 2-8 “Sl Big bargain. Call owner, PR 2-1153 i ! : son ‘ rt jsMat L furnished or partially furnished] TYPIST, network Radio City $30 SBR ARTAN. PhD or MS. Hoboken .to $3,200/2800 34 Av, Bronx (148 St) Clerk. typist 

Whist W art i. lady's gold _Hamilt« on, for Connecticut Offices—Brooklyn & Long Island & ~ af so ee Dec i, perm; business}; SWBD Receptionist-Typist. uptn. $30-35 _ BEPR oe, L i.» > 24 een Asst bookkeeper, knowl steno, exp unnec:|\6 FP M LA 

betu av & Hotel fue <7 IMMEDIATE OCCUPANCY HAMDEN, Conn. - Suburb of New Haven,/SPACE, 1 flight up, abundant window dis ar sees NT want i ry LILLIAN-K-SERVICE SECY, insurance brokerage. $40/222,5tart. Winning, Rattner, 298 Bway. |Clerk, begin: 

, f wanted, furnished, 2 bed-|, .1« RWAY TIMES BLDG|SECY: export. midtown ¢40| Asst bookkeeper, knowledge stenography A) Test \ 


and fully rented: modern Play, suitable for howrooms, salesrooms 
ap; ately $3 no " - . " ’ _— r orre 
ide od, LA_4-034¢ chain store only, 5-da S5OISECY, contract bond writer.... $38-40)'YPIng; experienced preferred. LO ’ Clerk, typists 


[U 4-39 | completed 
Wks? WATCH, lady's Bulova platinum) APPROX, 2500 $a. FT. and up-to-date apartment house; 8 3-room|offices, etc; 5 corner rooms; will subdivid ~ Bkpr, F. C., x 
‘ g with diamonds; vi ‘Sth del an 4-1 1 apartment Net income/to suit; attractive rental; opposite Dhiyn LADY, - rooms, bath, kitchenette; mid-/peor, F.C’, manufacturing exp BKPR, some steno s38}Asst bkpr, mfg exp; know! steno prid eS8a 
town 15-580. MI 0125 BRkpr, Bronx, small set, 5-day 40ISTENO, CPA office $35/5-day week; advancement. MI 1538 Clerks. benra 


$0! Park A ‘ 4 KI 234 Fireproot sprinklered 25% c2.5 per year. For particulars write K72|Paramount Theatre Apply Enduro Res 
WRIST WATCH, diamonds and rubies, 20 light a fe con- m jtaurant Flatbush-De Kalb Avs, Bklyn FURNIS’ED APARTMENTS WANTED [Gen Ledg, bkpr, kn P&L statemts, 5 3t SWITCHES dD math major, 5-day $35] Assistant bookkeeper, accounts receivable; |f 
4s Sunday evening reward nection with retai business q Ww H Quik Action RE 4-6860 (Broker) Asst bkpr, accts. rec day 3ISWITC OAR receptionist $30-35} publis) firt 19 °4 - , 
anted Desk Room—Manhattan & Bronx |... As pr, WITC) S| publishing firm. 419°4 Ay, 5th [Clerks, typin 
: Apartment Houses i-5 ROOMS, East Side, 30th &|Secy-steno, exec type, must nave sim bkgd,/CLERK, bkpg background $32] Asst bkkpr iyplat, familar general olficc cw Ph 


* 2-438 _ WEST permissible for tenant suit : 1 between 
FINE CHAR- SHOUSES and apartment buildings wanted./5 AV, 475 (OPPOSITE LIBRARY)! oth st, until Apr: $275. X2544 Time fine 3 age to 33. Midtn, 5-da.$200 mo|STATIST Typist. some steno. 5-day. .Open|*. yw . --4 7a Tee 
: X2544 Times ne app, ag ) ' TYPIST. some math background $31! yutine; dress line; full details. K1 ‘ Clerks. order 


R o vd, latinum, black} able for |this 
we cSt WATCH, diamond, pa TR 7-516 57 ACTER BUILDING. | Charles K. Clisby, 133 W 72d St MAIL, TELEPHONE SERVICE APARTMENT RENTING CO Stenos, several . $3! . honk kesh 
ee ; Attractive conference rooms, telephone}. - ~ ee . —— S + me ae oe COMPTOMETE re . $30) Asst okkeeper, 5% days 44-hr wk; $3 
$00 REWARD th L. 4. PHILLIPS & CO., INC. is Buildings & Factories ee en, cearteeas basen to EN 2-1377./0en0, nice appearance, Ghowrecm SIEDIPHONE Operator + -$30|Williamsburgh sectn. EV 7-7358, Cremin |Clerk. canes 
ST 134 West 72nd St. TR. 7-9300 3B) ~ Manhattan & Bronx supervision; est 1934; efficient and reliable.|MAJOR, | wife, 2 children require 3-4/2 Sitr cwitchbd operator, clerical "$: Pages, Clerks, Typists, Stenos Assist in stencil department, knowledge lings, 
7 © zeturn t ’ or your own broker \is?TH, 597-601 E Factory building for|MADOR SERVICE, 5th fl. =» —XMU__3-1093) _Trooms 3 months references WA_7-0887 Monitor bd operator, nice appearance $08 Many _ interesting positions of addressograph and filing. DI 4-2581 Clerks, 
< _ Lyons R. Lee de ( 0 John St. |Smoe ‘sale, 5 stories and basement, fully rented./STH AV, 545. sligh-clnes — = cae _ Unfurnished Burroughs bkpr, #2100, Bronx, MERIDIAN 233 W 42 Rm 209)/Asst mail clerk, no exp, 5-day wk, $22; m, ad 
BE 3-02 BUILDING MATERIAL |Christman, 601_E 137th, Bronx 54. ___ | etre oomes desks, ANE nn | a ner aL E> 35th to 80th. S-room modern|Burroughs biller, 5-da sj belGeeet tess er aetna, memnenp Open steady. _ Phone AS 4-040 ‘ Clerks 
— - - —~ ES i 4 7a. , Tooms, s Cl : d apartmer yreferably furnished, ample|Compts, severa 5- ° 30)L -s ’ N, ° Ass r, start; 5 days: iy.\A 12t 
S107 REWARD, lady's pendant watch, dia-| Brooklyn & Long Island 5 AV, 521 (43) (1004). Mail-telephone|closet space, wanted by couple; will pay|Typist. rapid, 5-da 30/SPANISH-English recy. 5-day to SSincsentiatt & Kahn See ae Cie 
minds, saprures stm we | - ’ GARAGE, Flatbush, I-story, 8,000 sq ft; privileges use of desk $100-$125. Call MU 2-0397, after 10 A M. |Clericals-typists, very many, sm 5-d.$2 MEDICAL secy, 38% hrs, hosp Open a bookkeeper Scout alain Sa erks 
ga teverse om Ranger lias i : ; ey priced low for quick sale; possession./e" av" "946, Private desk, $15 monthly;|4, 5 OR 6 ROOMS wanted in 2-family - - AGENCY > ~|Bookpr acctht-office mgr, cosmetic. Open], 1501, 245 5 ~y~ yh pply 
Jadies’ garment # mn or on bus. ’ 4 mniM. C. O'Brien, Inc, 798 Nostrand Av ’ telephone service. house or apartment: Flatbush only. Cail STARKS AGENCY, 48 E 43D ST. Bookkeeper, F C. midtown real estate $40) 200M 1501, 245 5 Av (28 St Clerk 
Payne. A I & « John § : Lee : Lie ae mR 4.8200 mat elepnone serv? ales a sAtOTe CEly au STENOS, 6-day week to $45). , $3 o| Assistant bookkeeper, typing, steno; excel) 
; aoe | Bkiyn. PR 4 > > eS (097 Mail. pb lce, $2/VO 1514 fter 6, MU 4-1780 oe : q SECY. fashion, expd midtown 5-$4 a L 
3.028 rel | ME IBUILDING and yard, 152100, driveway,| “0. 0) © (en): nt dcoenble Is UNFURNISHED 2 FC. BKKPR, Grand Central area... .S40/STENOS, widtown, others $25-$30|0pPty; 40-hours; $30. 250 W 57th (6th fl) .|Ciks, bes's 
$50 REWARD, return of platinum and) gi 7 Z 3.500. Morris Felder, CU 6-2446 monthly efficien , dependable . — or small apt by | SECTY advtg agcy, Rockefeller Plaza. $40/CLERKS, Billing 3. file 2, gen! 4 to $30/Asst bookkeeper, Knowl typing, expd, perm ty. 1 
. * pir he ind diamo! % ; } : i2D > W (925). Attractive desk space, iness woman ‘ or commuting dis-| RANK TELLERS, expd, downtown $2,000 Typist. some billing 3; beginners 5. .to $28 excellent oppty K224 Times | Clerks 


bway iA 











New Jersey "mailing mplete, efficient, service tance. Y2584 Times ; oT TK 9ERS, seve o $188 
: F g: comy ficte COMPTOMETER OPERS, several, ..to TYPIST. export dept. 5-day 0 ‘ F 
20,000 sq ft, oy ———— — as » i3D—342 MADISON AV (804) "> room apartment; Bklyn; $45-$50./PAYROLL clerks-typists S $30. Si BUSINESS machine ciks all kind dina a Feidnane hw — Clerk 
. . SER. space, railroa iding, excellent light, Mail-Telephone, 3 Mos, $5 6-S7K¢ STENOS, *‘tys. many. fine cos > = = ¥ 
On repairs, now, oF post-war im- fj Sa transportation stem he oe *s Quiet Otiice DOCTOR wants main floor apt, 4-6 rooms:|KEY PUNCH OPRS. alpha. 5-12 RE op yt he tol C~ a F 360, 8-day $25 /Asst bkpr, typist; payroll, accurate; ad E 
provements, call us for Lime, Sand, | C. B. SNYDER REALTY CO F WITH (347 MADISON AV)— SUITE 1311 modern bidg, uptn Manhat. Z 3880 Times. SUPERVISOR, comptometry dept ye CASHIERS (2). rest & other. $30-$35-mls vancement; 5 day. Benton, 370 7 Ay Clerk 
Cement, Plaster, Neat, Lath, etc. 61 NEWARK ST, HOBOKEN, N MAIL—PHONE—DESKS—STENO PROFESSIONAL couple, 214-314, to $65,/HOSTESSES. restaurants d& hotels. to $40) Cosmetic dept. drug stor, to $40, tnexp.$30|488t bookkeeper, knowl steno; 5-day wk ; 

Hoboken ae i6Ti1 (366 MADISON AV), SUITE 1412 | Bklyn, near subway. BU 2-4250 ASST BKKPRS (2), typing, advtg agcy..$35|“OM Ror oe See BWAY. | Dermanent, Mandel Fabrics, 469 7 As Clerk 

6 ; ? } n ear subway } 125 7 eRe ° . 3 
| 4 CLERK, accts receivable, 5-day $3 on — +4 Asst forelady, expd children’s dresses; sec 
| wu) A PERSONALIZED FRIENDLY SERV-ltion week work. ZH894 Times Clerks 


“97 Years of Service’ | ENTIRE factory building to let; fifteen aE 
, . A ° MALI TELEPHONE — SERVICE WANTED. 4 rooms, unfurnished, Flushing rc oC . ours 12-8 
DEIR CLERE, eye. Rete am ICE TO APPLICANTS FOR ALL 


= uare feet two floors ' 
bapet a ae may pt ie.| BROADWAY, 1123 (307), Mail, teleph ST 4-2028, evenings carer ‘atemn we 4 » vaca. $38 
. 02 1 “vic its Mad alin ' ; ' - ry aye pot d wit sprinkle red bY tom, one - ae ay Desks, $5 "wurnished offices, Seti 4 goer. 3 fe - ~— 2 $30 TYPES OF OFFICE POSITIONS Asssitant bookkeeper, ladies" shoe mig 
ewars._5U Y ' ,' inquire Ape 2 plums 2° BYO8’\RWAY, 1472 (42d). Keliable mail, tele-|_ Apartments and Rooms to Share ee ¥ , (MOTION PICTURES PUBLISHING |¢XP4;_ $28 start, 5-day. GR_7-2788 
z | ; ees So om phone service; $2.50. Abbott (904) MADISON-79T1, 1-2 girls share smal PERSONNEL SERVICE _  |ADVERTISING COSMETICS|Asst bookkeper-typist; 5 days: Bronx or 
phone service 2.e ybott (904) VA 6 pon Ext 232 ge Rg 15 E 40TH ROOM 803 RETAILING TEXTILES| Manh resident. LE 4-2200, Miss Kay 
y 1 McEner 9-! SECTY personnel off midtn $199 |BANKING APPAREL |Assorter, better dresses; complete charge 


Wearing Apparel | Other Sections ~ . 
BAUM marten scarf, 3 skins, Saturday, webiste ed 800,000 fi, large floors. siding, $500 000 | Business Places ereosmaneess) |ELDERLY Jewish lady will share S-room| 2x6) sabe nee O ethan $170 lRADIO MFG|good pay. APS21 Times 
Sao | 350,000 f ne or siding ISTH ST (bet Sth & Madison). 400 sq ft.) apartment with suple. For information TYPIST CLK personnel off midtn..$162 |ROOKKEEPERS, STENOS. CLERKS. ETC roo a Gah wank GGubual Galan 


: whet} 00,000 ft, two-story, heat iding,$75,000 inf ished 4 large windows facing|cal) sI , 

GOLD colored embroidered wool jacket,| | 0.0 ( , 7 unfurnishe arg ! &) ] L 6-87 SECTY advertising 5 da. midtn £150 EXPERIENCE EG IERS . " L R 
— * Ma table —_ 190,000 ft e-story e steam, $9,000 - suitab or artis de *rint j sing » , CED & BEGINNER 08. Susan Sage, 134 W 37th 
left on 6 Av t PM, ¥ buitable| Houses—Queens 120 0oO ft mast ane story. sidine,. £45,000 (Abreet: suitable for artist, Alden Prints./REFINED, congenial, pleasant young tady| ASST BKKPR & STENO advtg....$150 | SALARIES $25-$60 cad ids” haanllal  anabalanen 
reward E 3-4830, Clark JENGLISH type, detached, large corner/ir' h gonstein, 505 5 AV. MU 2-0326-7-8./Ananiy GENT 2ONE-T cnt exeelaly ues) desires share apartment with} PAYROLL CLERK $150 | BEGINNERS OR yg oy Ee 
“Ph |GRAND CENTRAL ZO ow rent, excel-ivoung lady. Mornings, BO 3-3033 FILE CLERKS 5% da $135 We have hundreds of good positions Bank iti -_ f a i 

an pos ons open or eeinrs; perm 
Box 628, Church St Annex, N Y 


MINK scarf skins, labeled Holt Ren i ma t isiv {« ire 6 room 
A : eward neld ' y reatio | . Wanted lent ligh sultadle studio, ete approx! 44 i . 
a (24-434 lison; reward | fe i. STENO kno German 5 da $130 with outstanding firms. A good num- 
Tavioc, RI , araj $16,0 xclusively| SMALL loft building wanted, from 5,000)mately 900 feet. VA 6 1955 Moving, Trucking, Storage CLERK kno typing 5 da. midtn $130 ber_are for 5-day week 
MINK scarf, 4 skins RCA Building, Ban. eee ano — od 40,000 _ft._ CH 2-5708 Business Places Wanted LEXINGTON MOVING AND STORAGE sw2D oF ime ene sidtn ‘al te % KAHN AGENCY, INC. Bothmalds, 325; chambermaids, 08; me 
’ W eore ‘ 70 UU 7 202-10 W a9 NE\ TORK RECEPTIONIST attr 25-35 midtn : -108 28s Sundays otel Oxford, cor 112th 4 wa 
MINK scarf, # skins, vicinity RCA Bldg [BEAUTIFUL new 2-tamily brick, complete| Lofts—Manhattan & Bronx [euat 4 ae Soe mer oes ' TRAK ALGA R 10 Span SECTYS midtn $130 ROOKKEEPERS. Biller, costume jewelry. David Grad Co 
scar BAITS, . fet walk ¢ at bwat 3 . > “el. nidto Manhattan, Th ancy vefore —- oh. Yr, at ++ . —— na ~~. - , , 
@unday. rew 1Ontel lat eee Sen Se ee ae ST, — a Sh lsan. 1. Plastoid Corp, BE 3-1608 SPECIAL RATES TO CALIFORNIA yy te a ene © midta. = ASSISTANT BOOKKEEPERS 303 5 Av. NY 
$25 KEWARD for return of “mink fur ‘th St - bya Af fille , 4112 4 igth, AL 4-7520 ILOFTS wanted, approximately 30x100, be- RI D BAL a ‘ AN LINES EDGE a ~ <7 72 $120 meeeneee «~~~. +-- rc —A3 pane, charee clerk, ae, suits 
neckpiece lost Oct 27 between E 50th and : . tween 3lst & 38th, 6th & 8th Avs 37 Great Jones St SDN p a - oppty. } an, Haft, 500 7 Av 
W 46t n t i ed at curb. Phot Houses—Nassau-Suffolk | S62E, . rigs ~. = = b3 — 7 WwW diate) {1 7-4016 , . ew York. GR 7-4810, 511 5TH AV ieee Se Billing clerk, accurate at figures Fine 
Dove N J, 2071 lect or Wile 20<°\GREAT NECK Lovely cheerful brick| y , “ ‘ LOFT. midtown-downtown, 5,000-10,000 sq ___COAST TO COAST SERVICE Bkpr, sm steno, sm off, midtn. .. $173 OFFICE MACHINE OPERATORS pay! Advancement! Perm! DW ¢ Time 
I 5 } perfect dit! bed- |——— W North Light {t. empty or with machinery for sports LEXINGTON STORAGE Secretary-detail, vic. W 59th St, 54.5150 . cl ERICAL . Billing clerk, experienced, 5-day week 
$60 REWARD. Persian lamb coat & muff 2 baths: n room, bath; doubl Be PH ore antfacturing wear. Good lighting. GR 3-214 190 4 St. Newark. Bd Secretary-yng, records, mid, future.$150 BEGINNERS Apply Ashley Music, 1600 Broadway 
tained in b eft on White F S| garage he t 120x130. Newly de Sa om. Immediate possession! |INDUSTRIAL space, 3,000-5,000 sq ft; Phone Market 38-0375 — retary — dept £ ag -— zie SALARIES TO $60 Bkpr, full charge, factory payroll, mail 
J. Pay jorated 1] ! ted win 4 ENTURY, Phone BR_9-9153 possession by January 1. AL 4-9890 SPECIAL RAIES TO CALIFORNIA Typist pubh. mid 7 to. wee *yng.$150 MANY GOOD POSITIONS 5 days; $35. A0820 Times 
BE ) . r F 5 P 7 = v —s 4 . / . ) « . ¥ $i a) > — we > 
! y | Sg ae Ft | 5 ST 333-39 WEST LOFT, light manufacturing, 2,500 to 3,500) FLORIDA, all So States, Boston, Chicago. Typist will teach edi. 9-4:45. 5da...$140 MANAGER. La pape So —— 340 | nookheener, assistant; piecework payroll 
Cats, Dogs and Birds : S iddie Neck Rd. 1 03 cy 8 QUARE FEET ft, alternating current. GR_ 3-537? + he yeal 1819. r your hate 7+ Typists (2) yng $125 10% bon $137 |=— = a ih rv [iNCfm accurate at figures. EV 58-4680 Clerks, general 
t j 1 middie Neck Rd. 2¢i 103 ) to § SQUARE FEE ngel Bros - tway. CO 5-3160 Tenis - ; ST: ENC ; g30\ity ward 
< = ; ; - : . - Saahell  eltieus : Typist-advtg dept. 5d, yng .. $120 a AVENL E Bkkpr, asst; post-war oppty; 5 day; $30 
LOST. Black Cocker paniel, Brooklyn |MAI VERNE 56,500, vacant, 6 pg attic ayligt f 8, unobstructed, | ae. aca Mortgage Loans i | AMERICAN Storage. Private rooms, furni- Typists-Clerks (oeveral sm. 5d $118 147 NASSAU ST. start. 370 7 Av, Room 1625 Clerk, some 
Reward. PR 4-1 | 40x100, insulated, kitchen, tile shower anuf ir 24-hour service; mOG- IMORTGAGES, real estate bought, high) ture, trunks, moving, long distance. Chi-| Cierk-detail. sm typ. 5d. Bklyn $150 BKKPRS, exp, some 5 da oes Bkkpr. accounts receivable, large mfg con-|UT' 120 
ND if : age ear station, school I rinklered bull th Ayenue prices; any building refinanced any bor-|cago pts. Boston, insured. SC 4-0908 oa . ASST Bookkeepers, 5 da . a. . eat "“Sunete Weenen = 
FOU WH 4-4079: LI 449, after ¢ was rne toffice opposite . . 2 E . ° Comptometer Oprs. yng, 5d ....$130 - = a : cern. NCR 3000 exp pref. DF675 Time Clerk-typist 
: ‘ Li j al ) subway at < : 908 ice opposi ough Broker protected Samuel Hur VANS going Florid Pitisb i. B - === | INVOICE clk, knowl Spanish. .... week if 
going orida, Pittsburgh, Boston, ELLIS SERVICE CLERK-typists, 5 da: 9-5 , . Bookkeeper, with secretarial background 


Pol ND—-L ady s wrist watch; give details : “ : sion Fe i194 Owner on prem- > ; 11 7-5930 K . 0 
hi v409 Tir Houses—Westchester County . , , wits, 2 W 4oth, _W1 F = Sal Wash. Allied Pittsburgh. BR_9-1951.__/so9 § av (42d) 355 E 149th (Bronx)] MAIL and file clk, 5 ‘da FL_3-5155 Clerk, typist, exp, perm 
Houses—Manhattan & Bronx SCARSDALE vicinity (New Rochelle) LIBERTY ST, 105-7. Dry, high ceiling Mortgages For Sale ren ALL MOVING JOBS” SECTY-steno, coll grads, statist,5-da.$40] CLERKS, beginners, 5 da...... $24-$23 shor Elliot Fisher; gd pay. 400 Carroll _ 

-: i = nha c nial, recent. ¢ truction; |“ phasement: 6.000.sq ft, for storage of| | OWNER MUST SELL! ENDICOTT EXPRESS ENdicott 2-4900.| SECTY-stenos, many $30-$35| TYPISTS, exp, some 5 da . . .$30-$28 ‘Akiyn CU _6-1500, Mr. Newman Clerks, part time 

70'S, E. Great bargain; lovely ca a eh apen sf 5, paneled game room, lrecords, etc: direct access to street. Prem- Purchase money $10,000 first mortgage Furnished R East Sid RECORD clks, typists, gd at det,5-da.$35) TYPISTS, little exp, several.. $26 Beokheper: steady; little typing. Triboro| ra { 

pated rear, Nees ei ondition, [ce &, convenient RRSPOr ts r RE 2-5500 st 5%, 5 years. Amortization ee urnished hooms—kas @ | DITTO typists, midtown $35+|] TYPIST-clks, 5 da: 9-5 $25 |Machinery, 147 Grand St. N Y C Clerks, jr, be 
utif ise, § cond - I mmediat upancy t t — itable , colored, 15 family. 100% rentec 23D ST, 145 BE. Near Gramercy Pars TYPIST, biller, traffic dept, 5-days. .$32] STENOS, exp, some 5 da S- = _ 

° mod price Roe 6 Might re rl T. Ahner carsdale 7 50 sq ft, suitable showrooms, renovated Rent $4,500 Property KENMORE HAI L TYPIST. train Ediphone, 5 day $32} STENOS: 5 ys beginners Pe oe Bookkeeper-asst, gen office work; $30; for! da i 
25 footer, Limestone Elevator.| | g nanufacturing; Ist-2d floors. 1162) t wold. X2249 Times 4ana 4 4 FC ASST. bkprs, some. S-days. ..$30-$40|—— NOS. g _..$26-$28-$30 art store; 40 hours. X2648 Times Clerk-typist 
re” oo 35,00 Houses—New Jersey just, sold Tirst-morteaae of $31,000, In| DAILY “ROM $1.75 V_ J. DOLZEN. Met.| Key PUNCH opers, 5:30-11:30, 5-4. .$40 NM : Seckheeser, asst, U-dap week, ‘vacatlen,| wk / 

10,000 sq ft, two story, part ee een ee vation E.~ Comfortable quiet "single SHIER, transp co, 11 AM-7 PM. $35 240 BROADWAY tonp City Halld poruue_ good salary. E. 8. Lowe, 77 W 20th \Clerk, young 
ERK, Monroe calcul, expd, 5-day. .$34 . Established {o10 y ) Bookkeeper, srowing adv agency; rood sal t lad 
excel cond nssured future. AS 4 Clerk-typis 
E lp 





thousand 


n 


nt 4-166 
da i i s 





ling } EY 
843. morning [RIDGEWOOD ae ~~ { 6 reece modern; sans ‘ge elevator, good light: ideal] terest rate 5%, payable quarterly; prem he 6: gentler x 
‘ al & |!ses 1991 joston Roac sronx , ciks, subject ex b- . 
E . P xp, some 5-day. $32 LAW STENOS. Se - 
RKS, begn & expd, some 5-d..to $30 “throughout Cirenter tt ae ae Bkpr asst, typist for piece-work payroll 


Cc 
cL 
: e Houses—Connecticut P ee a food = afacturer Timm principals only need write. Inquire , Bs |SOTH, 156 E Double, “akoals furnished;| FILE 
Be sonsinm of Of tment: p $9,000, |... sehret rr 939 . M. Re rtolo, attorney, 298 Broad Av, Pali reasonable cl 
|WESTCHESTER and near-by Connecticut! DOWNTOWN | Bklyn. 30,000 sq ft, 6 story.) sades Park, N J SSTH (1264 Lexington) (7B). Attractive, APPROVED PERSONNEL employers on some to $45 *|shoe line. MU_5-0985 Clerk-typist 
large sunny, single: elevator 7 E 42D, RM 811 LAW Stenos, dailies & part time..to$9 |Bookkeeper assistant, expd typist; estab 


a ph TD Co rc+ | properties. George Howe, Inc, 527 5 AV.| elevat ikler ale-lease warehouse 
N cHR NG “BROTHERS, INC.) y*y GC _ eevanes ; owe 
E HR I " . oe jN_¥ < jmant g. Banks, DE 2-0613 = Mortgage Loans Wanted s6TH, 230 E. Large front, telephone; busl-| SECRETARY, radio $35 | STENO-Sectys, all types of firms jlished firm; perm. K1i94 Times Clerks, bright 
+: Houses Wanted simmer re et & Bronx MORTGAGES, certificates, deeds, bonds ne udy: references Kowanda JR SECRETARY, midtown $35 throughout metropolitan area to $50 |Bookkeeper, complete charge; know! priori-| 
Income Realty John & Co 60 Broad St ASST bookkeeper-clerk, midtwn $35 F C BKPRS & Asst Bkprs, many.to $45 /|ties prefd: part time: $1 hr. WA 19. |\iecke-tvaiede. expos 


FOR RENT. Sub-lease on unfurnished prt. NASSAU GOUNTY. 6-7 t 2 
Jint I fr Ss 4s room houses id . s 
im Se NIM ned , ne 1001.12 3 W (near Bway). 1-story build-| Apartments Furnished—Manhattan Furnished Rooms—West Side BURROUGHS #7200 Biller, 5-day. .$32 CLKS, Typists, perm & temp to $35__/Bookkpr, asst, exp cash repts, disbursemts 
17TH, 70 W Single room, newly deco CLERK, good at if 


PROVED ‘ , 
figures, 5-day $32 SAVE TIME, PHONE US knidge payroll, 5 d, $145 plus. 12 E % Cle pm . 
Apartments of One, Two Rooms rated; gentiemen; references: $6 SECRETARY, Radio City, 5-day . $30 GR 7-0820 Rockisaper, capi, sqct-tell Gast porma-| wees ae wa 


TORING PL. 3 »-family brick 








ed « t Ans tation. BE ¢ 1439, Mr. Levine ing tore basement, 25x100 team, elec 
t, wood-|WANTED ¢ t, om t by| trie! evator. Bastine & Co, Inc, 112), > , , | 
earl Prot “tamily’ with, two children,|£_ 19th. AL _ 4-7520 60 «ng eg Hg RM. HTM ST BROADWAY wie Cah ~ ag 4 ert “ pa Re A J if ve pore nent; opportunity, BA_7-2988 Clerk -ty pint ’ 
\26 5 ) . base ts,|, Suitable fo ing, ) she TR ‘ILE CLER excel oppty a le position, Great man yr : \ RAR Pree 
"vid. modern lo story bldg, sprinkler [take over lease, Telephone mornings only HOTEL SENDAUL way - opportunities now available for Bookkeeper, full charge, dress experience ' 
W i 14x 10¢ le l ry bidg prinkler.|' : PPRENTS TRU DEPENDABLE Sena - > aeaaroe day week; $32.50. WI 9554 
ntment. | ¢ ir. } sArclay 7-030 2 |Bastine & Ce 112 E 19th, AL 4-7520.]TA_2-6356 MONTEREY 45 W 41 ST, ROOM 610 AND ALL’ OFFICE’ PaRaonre aeeclesiot sent cotale clllccr 00 al | afl gr 
ke jdaytime only 27 ST, 45 W (near Bway Store, base- —- y 4 meg ee fur-/400 Rooms, 400 Baths (tub and shower)| BKKPRS, FC, d assts $35-$50 _— a eae Kelly FO 7-6 00. ase oascuiemens les k ble t 
ane 60'S-70'S-80'°S (Sth to Lexington Av Pri-| ment 950x100, modern, 12-atory building nishec citchenette; $20 weekly Modern 14-Story Fireproof Building SECTYS, acctg offices $35-$45 , vv. ro . — ; ee capes St 
Houses Riverdale | ate house aaah of , Ww il pay above| prinkler. Bastine & Co, Inc, 112 E 19th./76TH, 146 W Furnished 2-room apt, Double—$4 to $5 Per Day SECTY, insurance brokerage $35 Walt Ae AanCe ye —— CRENCNTE, OES. Was : 
OXFORD AV 238 6(235~=COSt 7 room| market price 1AL 4-7520 kitchenette, Frigidaire, bath 9 . 7 > : STENOS, res buyers, export $25-$30 }|—————— PRE oa . ~ ace Agency 75 > AV Clik, yong, law offi 
a ey + 40x10 ear pa-| et as ars - =a ing, | 79 “ys 9. 2-Room Suites—$ Per Day TYPISTS. advtg agceny, etc... .$28-$30 REMIER PERSONNEL Bookkeeper, fuli charge, nice position, 5-\@ ix 
2 M. C. BERG 49TH, 209 FE Ground floor, loft building,|77TH, 128 W. 24-room, furnished apt, >To : ® > 10 E 43 St, Room 804 d 0. Cc ? 
r al 5s transportation and shop-i993 w. 7o9t t TR 4-4718.| sprinklered; 40x140. AC 2-2754 with every improvement Friendly Complete HOTEL Service _CLERICALS, many 5-day $25-$30 SECY-STENOS, effic’ attr to gaaian® $40. CH 3-0233. 
Trianon Restaurant—Bar BUSINESS VOCATIONAL ACCTNG CLK. Real’ Estate exp $40 we Seo foe $30 start 
— : = oe Clerk, beginner 


Clerk-typist, pieasa 





$12. L : LO | SUBURBAN area, for Dec 1 rental, 4 or 3/BROADWAY, 1650. Excellent location, 51/84TH, “153 E. I room, kitchenette and Telephone Riverside 9.3800 
Houses—Brooklyn | bedroom, unfurnished house. LA 4-9400,) St side, for ladies’ wear, millinery, lin-| bath; $60 month 7 at. Sepuone Riverside oa 152 W 42D, COR BWAY ACCTNG CLK’ familiar machines $35+| B35 x 7 ri 
63 ST, 429 (Bklyn »-family brick ftor|=*' 4 weekdays 9 t lgerie, jewelry, optician. Agent on premises.|9j7q ST. BROADWAY. |47TH, 114 W (Woodrow Wilson Studios),| BKPR-SECY, midtown, 5-day....to $45 |CHARTIST. Research Background... open|H0oxkecper, expd. good hours ay ag By 

“ e immediate sseasion PRIVATE houses, Manhattan, Brooklyn,;STORES and basements, Manhattan, 9,000 HOTEL Everything practically new, 1-3 rooms BKPR, downtown, 5-day $40 |ADDRESS & Variety P. oprs'5d mdtns$30-35 Sore reiman & Blaustein Ave B. NY‘ Clerks, 2 
— — “4 = os | B x Vestcheste broke protected feet net, 6,500 feet net. Write Linsky GREYSTONE Kitchenette. showers $8 up| BKPR, Bronx res, oppty $35-$40 |PAYR CLK: sm typ comptom; Bonus & $32 Bookkeeper-typist, expd; perm; 5 day wk ‘ 
93 ST, 6 s-fOeGh, 2-tney SOU C. Maye 70 Bway, WO 2-5828.__jbroker. 607 6 Av 500 room 500 “batt tub & showe 52D, 223 W (cor Bway). Hotel Alvin, daily) oe Gyo. eNO. insurance, 5 day..$35-40 |CLKS, gd typst: 5 de Siad $25-$35) $30-$35. Edmund DeWan Co, 22 & IClerk, beginner 
€ pr als 1 “ § ooms, 5 » s { ower 22D, ce » d ° y, . ot vat " . " — — - € ecinne 

= Teo E = Sed brici “family, 3/2" EENS, Nassau, Suffolk. Ww anted anusual! BE Al TIFU L, light, store and basement;| ” haem sge aes Hes ceasmand building , $2 up. CO 5-4850 y y STENOS, splendid oppt y = SMITH'S PERSONNEL Bookkeeper, steno; witty, telephone person ‘ 

Fi Le ee st af etached b k me gh screage. Buyers| poss mn now. Linsky, Broker, 607 6 AV b. alin ates Only - ta co x. day $28. 4 1457 BROADWAY AT 42 ST, jality: busy office. Broadioom, 45 E t Clerk-iz pists 

—- gern # 1: 5|Walting. Egbert at’ Whitestone, FL 3-7707.! Complete hotel service STH W. Single, front; private; $10. CI) TYPIST-CLK. publishing | . PROOFREADERS-copyholders Open |Bkkpr, full chg installment, exp pref:|good pay. 
14|/ 5M Ml L house wanted in Lawre nee, Cedar- Stores—Brooklyn & Long Island Restaurant—Cocktail Lounge = CLERKS-TYPISTS. many, 5 days. -$25_ = . some steno. new firm = loppty- adv. L. B. Furniture, 3123 3 A F Clik, purchse de 

ASST. BKPR. typist 7 Bookkeeper, thoroughly expd, accts receiv S 


Midw | 
a t or imere. X2620 Times ase. L ‘SIDE AV, 172- 31; Jamaica. Excellent elephone SChuyler 4-1800 'S, W (park). Single, running water; CASTLE HILL —— wy 

Ww if BUY immediately, anywhere See Abe tion. V ariou businesses Brokers PrO-| FOR SALE. Completely furnished 2 rofms,| references EN 2-9169 2 WEST 43D ST SUITE 803 ee TY itehbd " one able; good sal: pleasant office. CA 6-6900 
ornstein 2 W 424 LO 5-4346 tected. Busy roughfare. TRiangle 5-0838.! serving pantry and bath Cooperative! cori: 61 W. Double, single: comfortable,| 2OOKKEEPER-STENO ‘ $35 IR areiat ghee re Y ‘Nabe Pe nom Skprs, asst, 11 S «rad, C P A firm: exp ‘ 
f [ 10 FAMILY houses wanted. Full par-|NORTHE RN BL ‘VD, 144-17; Flushing. Ex-/apartment in elevator building on 45 St,|” dng oo ag A he “ry bat! |) TYPS, rapid, to 35 yrs,mdtn,3-4 mo.$49 | <5. Ars, * s.F 1p. pen _/unnec $22 start. 102 Maiden Lane, 14th f lerk ol as a 

ek eet « ~~ so cached am-| ticular X2142 Times | lle srious businesse busylnear 5 AV Full price $2,250 Carrying ath : FILE CLK numeral, temp 2 weeks $34 ABBYE AGENCY Bookkeeper-secretary, experienced, for com a . -~ - 
ie dimaent ‘ tem: moder! xcel-| lr i-family house or tower floor 2-|." hfar Brokers protected. TRiangle| charges $70 per month Includes maid serv-|s1ST, 176 W (IW) ? singles, private en-| ADDRESSO OPERATOR, expd $32 112 WEST 42D ST. munity center. Call DI 0337 7 | - : 
F 4 ‘ ny ¢ ~~ vA ty ~ 0838 ice Occupancy Nov. 15 Social and fi trance, small private family; reasonable TYPIST, theatrical assoc, midtown. .$30 RETAIL DEPT Z ¢ Clerk, jr, clerical 
: MU 2-2259./Seen after 6 STATL TYPIST, 3-4 months......$7da_| MGRS, Buyers, Sales, Alter. ...$30-$100 a ae! ee ' 
es Clerk, no exp neces 


Clerks, no up 





dent ndition: st t cost owner any] famil ME 74 =_— 
¢ 4 en - Offices—Manhattan & Bronx nancial refs essential Equi ] a 3 Sale tic 
= ; a ?NG : : = ley" 205 r - - — - COMMERCIAL DEPT ce 
AL BERT M AN AG EMENT CO} sontor Boat __._ 5 AV, 246. Bargain: Private furnished of- gy oe wal i “Geukia, nevty termed: aioe" —— 209 M ——_ — 41 st BKKPRS, Stenos, Clerks........$25-$60 |Bookkeeper, full charge, expd, 33 hrs; 350! { 
185_Montague TRiangle 5-4390 = ; Florida t , tice, $20 monthly — listing; mail.) yiched, quiet, newly decorated, non-house-|housekeeping suite: maid service Copywriter mony fans Bacon «A exp.Open| CUSTOM DEPT mart Fleischman, 14 Wal! St — yo yo 
meg ea |Palm Beach, water front villa. Pool, win- — te rece i ished tel keeping; Upper Murray Hill; $150; respon-|192p, 316 W Immaculate, redecorated| Artist, advertising layout exp, attr. ..Open _Dressmakers, Drapers, Finish... .$25-$45_ a 5 see, publishing; $40 Marvellerts Fast: tod 
AY TY ae |, -er rer 1 available properties _ a ws vernished. yr %, e-isible, quiet tenancy essential. Give full! singles: steam heat; reasonable Steno, college, good at detail, adv agcy.$35 EDWARDS AGENCIES gency, 511 5th Av (43d Clerk, general, oppty 
ASTORIA. Owner sacrifices 3-family brick) van Rensselaer, RH 4-9172 phone attendant, walins room; s= Pe idetails. Kiel Times 110, 601 W (Bway). Singles, doubles, rua-|Secty, technical exp, to 40 yrs..........$35 nv ag hy: Bookkeeper, full charge, chain exp; book-jwar: 's hr 
bouse, 13 rooms, t ogg gg alarmed month up. Renting cme, ~— A Three, Fo r, Five. Room:| ning water, adjoining Dath cooking fa-|Section Managers, tall, attractive. . .$30-$35|Secty, Tech, Prod Cont, Mfg, Coil.... keepg mach. Day Stores, 461 8 Av (34th)./ Clerks, gen or type 
refrigerator ar gara ll impre ‘Farms & Acreage—Long island _ SAME SERVICE AT - partments, a Ms J cilities, phone service. Office Clks, typists, compt d& telephn opers.$25-$30 Sectys, NY. Bklyn, LIC, N J - Bookkeeper, small contracting firm; $25/Watern 5 Pe 4 
ments. near transportation 10 ri EB _ $2 7% 42D, 55 W Renting Office, Room 1220./30°S> East. Sublet, 3 rooms, 9th floor, 2)/°2" ele ———————— _ ~=£ — — t= | Typists, 5 Da...$35. Bkprs, many.. start. Columbia, 37 E 12 St i 
$105 terms.__Castorina 9-947 1 ACRE 29 DOWN | NETLEY SERVICE CORP. exposures; $1,200 to Oct. R1054 Times|!791TH, 8% MR og —) wrens sunny, ele-} HORN AGENCY, 505 STH (ap) Stenos, all locations. .$25-35. Ciks...$24-30| Bookkeeper asst, good typist, some aleno: |e’ sae ee ee 
? u- ‘ st. O | nting on 3 streets. totaling 600 ft] Downtown vacor, telephone; private; 30 ___.| Secy Steno to executive vee - Typists, all kinds. .$23-30. Devices... “2 ’ | as vane ‘| y Duplex 
go 7 yF t z ‘Owner, se r ge. ¢ LEARED LAND About %4 mile|44 ST, E. Sublet desirable executive of-|i0;- Fo —bedrooma, living room, serv-|RIVERSIDE (113th). Beautiful, sunny,|Secy steno, textile ...$35) Clerks, Girls &*Women, no exp acer We: Hall Bros, 417_5_Av_(30tt ineem-Cypees geen st 
Bn are Bing ttie gy’ 4 Blnagy = i tation: $6:200.|from stat monthiy a fice, 425 sq ft; rent $100. MU_2-7862.__ ing pantry available immediately. AS| large front, quiet; $12. UN 4-0563 Stenographers, severa!, 5 days.......$3 MODELS! 7 wid wy Fg hy Seetesy, payroll; | tid'B 
; mer I ansportation; $6 2. aa - ——— ing try; lable : ae Seat 4 ! : , 7 ' h 201, 261 5 Av : ae : 
Castorina, NE 9-947% | SSELL R. DOLAN 57 ST, 119 WEST 4-9585, Apt. 1A Furnisned Rooms—Brooklyn Typlets’ (10)... .ccscccccesesesess $04 IMMEDIATE ‘PLACEMENT Bookkeeper, payables, general ledger, taxes,|NorthernAssurance. 135. 
BEECH RST. Furnished modern 7 rooms,| 167-09 H je Av, Jamaica. RE _ 9-3912 Professional Bldg near Carnegie Hall 75TH, 322. W Living room, bedroom, Record clerks (2) .....+.«+ : FOR EXPD. ATTRACTIVE GIRLS payroll, expd; 5 day. Store, 35 W_ 3ist.|Comptometer oper, Burr 
‘ pendix washer; watertront priv. (CANNING factory, only partly completed; SMAL OFFICES , Kitchen, bath, shower, facing Hudson; |PRE SIDENT ST, > 1as0 Large state, wash-/Bank teller, expd MODELS SERVICE Bookkeeper, full chrg, restaurant exp, $35,\dey wh od fut M 
eges: price $1 000 cash. FL 9-4778) é ? yuilding considerable| & FLOORS, 3,000-4,000-7.000 SQ FT. [5110. 7 ' Siaemaened s } room ctor me \ > — te Ay AGENC meals: perm. MO 9-1232 : ~ 
FLUSHING Beautiful new brick, $8,950; leg mer acto bulldozer. etc $10,000; DWIGHT, VOORHIS & HELMSLEY. Inc.|80’S (near Riverside Dr). 4 rooms, $1,200;|SHEEPSHEAD BAY vicinity 3 attractive Aaron Es EY, MAIDEN LANE 77-5284 16 BWA TOW es ae Pe students, CPA firm: state ye gy or ge 
- me, : =. jcash, balance $60,000; 1 age. 30 years,| __44 FE 23 St. AL 4-1100,_or premises furnishings, $4,500. RE 4-6860. broker. | studio rooms, private home. DE _2-4389.}i1'S" girls, to $27; Col, $30: Bk Trn’s, $28:|BUSINESS MACHINE OPERS. HIGH PAY|¢duc, exp, sal. R1044 Times Downtown. |Compiomet 
, ips I 98 : 4 ( { } r le *T sor ~ . 9 \ 4 rrr _ ~ - ad . ya Fe a L- + . 2 : ne . . : omptometer 
12. —I* >= « Jefferson Sta-|S7TH (1776 Bway), Room 401. Front office| 100TH, W. 4 rooms, attractively fur- HOTEL PIERREPONT Clks, $35; Bkprs, $45; Stenos, $45: Typists Bkkprs to $50, asst’s $35 Burroughs billing machine operator; 5- r week 
FORE ST HIL LS. $6 190 ju in lawye te; phone service. _ gs ened gecomsBodate 3 adults 11 months, SINGLE & DOUBLE ROOMS $40: Swbhd, $32: Comp, $42: Address, $32 Stenea & tecrs oan Gey weik, Seam 268 4a 6 AC | SemmeSemesscs 
BRICK DWELLING—WALK TO SUB way| Farms & Acreage—New York State B EAV ER ST, 82 ae my wet alt a ae —— WITH & WITHOUT BATH Burr, $90; Diet, $33; E F Oper. $30: Ditto, Typists to $35: clerks to $50 Busgirls, will train! No Suns or holidays'| y. 498 7 A 
N decorated 6 room nodern |150 ACRE farm, 2 miles from State road; FLOORS & OFFICES ‘ment: 2 bedrooms: complete housekeep.|eietrepont_at Hicks St _MAin_4-5500./$28;_NCR. $30; Temporary jobs.___.....|  _ APEX. 239 W 42D, SUITE 204-5 _|President Cafeteria, 120 E 4ist Comptometer operat - wledge 
= apy Re A ag on I eg he vents; 200,000} aTTRACTIVE RENTALS ing; 6 months. Wailace (51) Furnished Rooms—Queens & L. I. AMERICAN JEWISH AGENCY, ma. 1472 BWAY (42 ST) Bus rirls, young. neat; uniforms-meals; no|ty)10 ! : 
. ‘ tose : Un = = DWIGHT, VOORHIS & HELMSLEY, *+/DOCTOR’S apt, 4 rooms, full kitchen;|FOREST HILLS Lovely room - 7 te teeeeee Sun, holidays. Stouffers, 346 Lexington Av.|Comptometer operator indies’ anearal 
arranged aq er Le , ’ ; » private!» O|Record Clerk, Bklyn.... cack ; hair 
QU EF NS HOME 7: co) _— & ae ee 44 E 23 t AL 4-1100 or Premises. immediate possession; $125. 171 W 12th bath, porch: opportunity retired or busi- Fc wae, ron ee = © a $30:335 Clerical, exp unn.c eee - ay anand enaky Lg a Imes | t 
‘ scon |/EREE CATALOG! State Map. Photos.| BROADWAY, 277 (cor Chambers). Large.) Apartments of Six Rooms & Over [ess woman seeking permanent home. BO/secy.sTENO (New Jersey), 5d....$35-$40|Record Clerks, exp unnec..... onan = ay ee ee : Cali jComptometer operators, for merchandise 
: , . € a f \ 


168-45 |} le A Jamaica /00.} . . mal! offices, furnished, unfurnished; in- 823 > I 

" ‘ A ‘ | Amer Farm Agency, Danbury, Ct. 926 . art é°S (Central Park W) 3 master bed-|°—'°* _.._ STENOG RAPHERS $30-$35|Ast Bkprs, exp unnec eee Sip 

at 169 St Sta Exit 8 A \Free uf > m|cluding telephone-answering service; Jow/™ ) ze » 'o —W Store -$50|Clerks, no exp, 5-da wk 23) EL 8.3000 |Comptometer operators , ing em- 
Free Bulletin—‘THE BETTER PLACES. Saal? ae lame raamined. take ee rooms, 2 large bathrooms, 2 maids’ rooms Furnished Rooms estchester Store Manager (infants-chil wear) .$40-$50 s “GORDON PERSONNEL Candy packers, 16-40, good pay, no exp,| tition: st Jamaica 


POREST HILLS. Owner sacrifices 1-fam 4 OcEP ~ - 1 - «+ ad : 4. ! Ly 
7 Gets y™ . ‘ors. 1-car|2:_M. JOSEPH, Danbury. Conn. Ph 4466 and bath; exceptionally large living andiqgy VERNON. Altractive sunny room, light HALPERIN PERSONNEL 33 W 42 ST. Steady. Barricini, 22-19 41 Av, L I Cc Cooks, Ist asst, als. breakfast, expd. Hoe- 


garage 


Also all avail 











venient. (F 


799 (cor llth). All s - ing ; z é P4 
co subways ex-/ dining rooms; high-class building: private housekeeping; garage. CH 4-1991 152 W. 42D ST. LO 3-5092 RM 620 Cashier assistant, retall store, Jamalea;\p!tal 


Farms & Acreage—Other Sections ress stops. Offices & showrooms, 2,000) ojeyator: entrance facin - 
] ~ + * -vato ance fi g park; immediate|— Secy steno, sales analy. 5d 7 

§ beautiful open arez il ime 9. "7 . zs . : i Ds VE -17 ic Vv ooks, eats eget 
FARM catalogue, 100 pages bargains; lals a a — Sig Premises. GR T1206 | possession. _HA_2-5331.__ Furnished Rooms Wanted {icra steno, ‘i-man office ochs tasers BY WOMEN ADVERTISING, TASH. ay wr ee te rae ere = At: lbaers. Stouffer's E x 
AV NY Gly ID rot Realty, SE-MlpwAY, 103 (200k). Uetento Varnithell sashes © ot’ calneae, Canali vient Ce woman wome Tie Taremanen) Seat Se Coane. a> et US--22- SIION PUBLICATIONS & COSMETICS. |50 W45 St iC ok, short order, steam table exp; #4 pay. 
; hy Av. N Y¥ City 10 . wo Ab + nishe rooms: balcony, beautiful view room in N Y¥ or within commuting dis-|Stenos, pubcty. etc, 5 da wee 30 | ——_—— — To ___ de aan eae” weed ae - 7 
° 1 (upstairs), Forest H NY F lrecentioniets: 15 « erwice somoeray TS.|cooperative building; $600 monthly, year’sitance. X2583 Times : Clerks, research, etc, 5 da : 5 WINTON, [10 W 40TH Cashiers, full-pt time; post-w opty; Xmas/| Apply * g i ge. Bkiyn, 
; i arms k ‘Acreage Wanted , puionist 15 up. Agent, Room 221 lease’ also 5 rooms: $250 monthly. Boyd ; ~ = - a _ . = BKPRS, dress, coat, kindred $50-$45 |bonus. Lerner Shop, 462 Fulton St, Bklyn lé ook children’s home. b rm & 
FOREST HILLS. Vacant; immediate occu-|_ IBW AY, 1445, Unluralthed sane, dicated en dcr LADY, middle-aged, desires room, kitch- WERNER BKPR, Bronx resident $55-$50 —— Hebrew H ‘ 
em - - at > ga-|PARM with running stream; must be con- LR ge z ead/RE 7-0271 en privileges. RH 4-6770 450 7 AV. COR 3TH. BKPRS, stationery, kindred. $45-$40 Cashiers, full, part time; a= ty a oppty; ‘i H *. ne, Ee -272 — 
, r - BKPRS. F C and asst $35-40 PAYROLL CLERKS mas bonus. Lerner Shop, 412 A‘ Y Correapons ~\ s swe ral neni cet 


venient f commuting to New York = ~ P -_ | De TY T 28 T T 
lwrite AP479 Tir ic HAMBE RS, 51. Spacious suite available; enthouse errace Apartments Unfurnished Rooms Wanted CLERKS-TYPISTS, beginners $25. Nt +m ey gg HS pest-wee pppts : 31 - 
— IZ Ss & zerner Shop. 27 , 42¢ N ¥ orset operator on ir 


eligr r =f 4 St. n W. AN I ED, small farm, 10-50 acres, within | ) ; ar) 5 auites. Emigrant Savings Furnished | LARGE unfurnished room by business woe- STENOS $25-30-35-40 “i : ° 3 a - 
NE Pars } les NYC. Fred Reuter, 74 Brook- Fe an c ig wo 2-1900, Ext 100 : 9471 EF. Furnished 3 rooms, terrace;|,™&n in New York or within commuting; —— — x ase TE, 300 MADEN AV. Cashlere, full and part thas. Apely afler ~~ 
FOREST Hit I s—V - ANT—$11,500 side Ave Mount Vernon, N Y¥ es R H 1 vf ho = ae nae light! private: $200. K234 Times istance 2582 Times einen 45 W 45 ST STOCK RECORD CLERK 5-day 2. Beverly Playhouse, 34 Av, 50 St Corset fitters, expd. Ap 
. . 4 nia I f é mec s8es- -— - - s ; 5 f erect | ' . 
Choice 1 ~' Detached—Colonial =| Lots—Brooklyn jsion BA 7-4983 siaeresece Studio Apartments == STENOS-BKKPRS-TYPISTS SECYS, stenos, typists, temp typists Coshlors (tube room) 5-day week. Saks) 2¢_1! : — 
——_———-| 8TH, 35 E (Young Women)—$i5 weekly, RECEPT-CASHIERS-CLERKS SALARIES TO $40. —_| Fifth Avenue (50 St) Corset operators, expd 
Cashier, experienced; permanent. Brown's OPPty Agnes 


frigerator, garage is ee | 


YI on REALTY CO. Wanted |JOHN (1004), 17. Sunny office furnished-| ~~ Furnished , oo E : IMMEDI ——— _s ; ; . 
cluding cellent meals yal s I} TE PLACEMENT! . 
- rnciad enceent — waiting list : a a z ae az. HEIGHTS, 381 Fulton (Boro Hall), * Bklyn. Market, 2274 Bway (82 St) c orsetiere-aiter: ation haad speciality shop 


__96-87 Qceens Blvd. HA 3-51 —|WILL buy income-producing property, ee eS STUDIO; skylight kitchenette, shower; FE . 2 ‘ ; 2a" : ( "l, ets) 
We he pe —— ven? — ae | sm i-lge, dee ds mits $100,000 property. LIBERTY ST, 136 — excellent location: tenant must buy in- 9 ay kp LEGAL 4 ZR — _ SICTAPHONE oprs, beginnelaa expd $7535 Cashier, for restaurant. Prince George °*! —— nT 
gpa r 3 gg 3- ae = ; oe le, den. 11 W 42d: CH 4-0630 (Rm _ 1732) onent rR y Fg op stallations’ lease. X2640 Times - view: suitable two. RI 9-4846 ‘ STENO, law, uptown, young.... STENOS-Secys (NY-Bklyn), sm_5-d.to $35 Hotel, 14 E 28 St | Cosmeticians, salary pilus commission. 
oat ts — Po cs FO IGT ER OFFICES, $25 re ic ”~ Sst STEN, cml, good hours... ‘ “| Cashiers, no exp, retail store: ;W 1560 Bwa 
~ Ww . Fe ee amines ames & ee Wanted | FuLLY SERVICED, 24-HR ELEVATOR _Apartments for Exchange Board for Convalescents STATISTICAL CLERK $35 sat ctoee Rng 4% yt 4-4 40|Goldsmith, 77 Oy et neat appearance. Pennsylva~ 
Forrest HILLS. Brick, $6 ena as use or bungalow, Atlantic Beach/DWIGHT. VOORHIS 4 HELMSLEY, INC.|GRAND CONCOURSE. Unfurnished 3 rms Westchester - ALBERTA SMYTH, 7 DEY ST. Fypiat-clerk., $25-30; Gat. typist. $25-30|/Cashiers, steady employment post war.|"ia Drug, 5 E 44.5 
ric } rms, com- i X2625 Times 44 E 23 AL _4-1190 or Premises.| in new building, for 4 or 4%. TR 2-2292.|0f{RGNIO” Bedridden and elderly, nice] Office Mach. Opers. Always Welcome. |Legal steno, $35-40: Typist, Bilit Apply John David, Bway at 32 St |Countergirls, soda girls, exp, inexp, will 
\ NY, 20 VESEY i Con for ladies” speciality tain. Employment off, 1212 6 Av. Ras 202. 


ry. redecor ated, garage. 105-15 62 Dr, BUY summer home, Belle Harbor or DOWNTOWN, sublet 1-2-3 small light of- LOVELY 1', unfurn, Grand Concourse, for’ grounds, porch, good food, attentive ASST MGR-clks, 5-day, sm office; oppty; $90. Ss ‘8 EMPLOYME hier’s aasisiant 
. we _ a tune fices; telephones, BO 9-2759 4-3, downtown, O274 Times ca t ona ble New Rochelle 6-9687 Heights (Agcy), 381 ulton, Bor Hall, Bklyn “Good Selection of Positions” shop. Emily, 2 W 37th. Continued on Followiewe Pace 


steamtabie; 





cel 


— offices phone 


. 








Vhelan Drugs 


mM 





-- = -_—- . 4 . “ ’ 4 17 
. - = . ‘ * : ‘ " ips. Mother eip Wanied male—Agences deip Wanied wialie—Agencies irk NEW YOu’ | ivVikS, NOV. l, 1944. L. 3 

Gils, interesting, light assembly work,|Office girl, typing-steno, know bkpg: $30./Stenos, typist-clks; messengers. Todd Kep) Waitress, salary and t rieip Wa agencies =| eleip Wa — bh BOCK eee ee Be EE Ee 
Help Wanted—Female Git nnere $23 start. 7th fl, 44% 23d \iatbush Memorial Chapel, BS 7-790. |USES, 86 River St, Hoboken, N. J Hubbard’ Restaurant, {3 University Pl. HAMILTOR ENGINEERING Sage ge yg aye 


Continued From Preceding Page _ Girl-waxer, rubber and metal molds; 5-|Office girl, office work, errands; 40 hrs, Sienographer-typist, accurate “with figures,| Waitresses and bus , Sirs. Restaurants Employment Service EMPLOYMENT SERVICE, 217 BROADWAY Wolf & Kohn, 270 Madis ‘ 
a aka ation Tt cans be a = _ a ‘Jelenko, 136 W 524. $25. PL 3-1688 40 hr wk, $50-35; gd oppty, IR 6-3280 Longchamps, 408 W_ 15 St 50 CHURCH STREET Partial List Only GIVE FULL FACTS | Collectors, Queens si I: high wT 
= : . 


l $26 start; $31.20 after| Office workers, also stenos; full-part time. Stenos, typists, file clerks, begnrs; 5 day;|Waitresses, good pay. Steward’s Dept, Hudson Terminal Building Works Manager, meta! stamping, drawin 


exp! Chock Full 0’ Nuts, 250 W_S4th.1G t , . - sions; car pid. F 
Counter girls, expd; no nights or Sun; training: factory’ work CA_6-4627. Empl Bur, F. W. Woolworth, 162 E 59th./perm. Liberty Mutual, 10 Rockefeller Pl. |Barbizon Plaza Hotel, 101 W 58 St. __ COMMERCIAL DEPT plant, Midwest, post-war to 15, IN ANSWERING ADS : ns; car f Finiay us. 2 
meat & willing worker. Huyler’s, 863 Bway.|Giris inexperienced, licht factory work.|Office assistant, general office routine.|Stenographer, experienced medical, young, Waitresses, expd, neat; fuli or part time.) ACCTS: Methods—proced ........$6000 Supt, machine shop, NJ ‘ — eiiontes oe man, car: perm; food sad. 
Countergiris, expd; 6 days, 9 hrs; salary|Princess Pear], 13 W 28 St Lester Sq, 491 7 Av. neat, “efficient. X2624 Times __|Huyler's, 286 5 Av (30th), NY ¢ e ACCTS: Cost instal. col. grad... ..$6000 a ae See sheet —. -* Due to newsprint restrictions, awaler Fur 102 101 A - 
$40. K157 Times |Giris. part time evenings, midtown; assist| Office girls, file clks; good sal. General|Steno, exp, 5 days; good sal; Bklyn firm;/Waitresses, short hours; good pay. App! COST ACCT ENGR: Conn $5700 Night Plant Mgr, machine ‘shop... 8,000 Help Wanted advertisers are | Compositors, union; steady Merris « 
; 5-78 Ele 570 Lexington Av, Rm _ 1702 write exp fully, K159 Times ll to 1, Hotel Cameron, 41 W_86 St.| ACCT: Mfr—L. I. 2 $4800 |: 4 _—ee - + : SWaish 129 Lafayette S 
}- 7960 slectric, 570 Lexing : = I : Wai a ii Club; unif * mis.| COPYWRITER: Industrial—N J°.Open |Plant Supt, plastic fabricating to 6,500 limited for space to state their 
aitresses, Cornell Club; ee a en ae ROUTE SUPERVISOR: Bakery $3900 [Indl Engrs, large, Conn mfr to 7,500 requirements. When answer- | Compositor, hand make-up; union. Prose 
TRAVELING AUDITORS: Theatrical |Aluminum Foundry Superintendent to 6,000 ing ads, it will pay you to | “Ladlow . 
Compositors, 


Schneide 


Countergiri, exp, $230, meals; short hours.j/in checkroom. CI _ - — he Monit board pd z 

Coffee Shop, Hotel Dixie. 250 43 St iGirl, 1 iflce, filing, Monitor board,|Office workers, several, interesting posi-| tenographer, Monitor board, expd; con-|W 
now! steno: sal ¢ “em 1104, 11 E 44th. /tions: postwar. Spear & Co, 524 W_ 23d enial sales office; $25 wk. LE 2-4090 Timekeeper, Hotel Barclay 
25| Steno, expd, some insurance; $25; 544 dys.|Waitresses, exp, days, excell work condi; write we te etn 3120 |Standard Practice men, mfg, account- 
Write stating age, educ, exp. X2669 Times.|tions. Marco Polo Rest, 1936 Bway (65th) Rg FO . . = ing or office procedures to 5.500 SS 


Waitresses, neat appearance, top pay, 4P-| bAyROLL SUPERVISOR: Accounting rine x + ~—_ ied to 7200 rience in full, names and ad- 


- ability—New Jersey ‘ . $2600 |... . ty 
| a — i ai . “NQT} 1 ‘ Ss Men, MA? ‘ Open * 
any boro. Bickfords, 429 7 Av. 2d floor.|Girls, some exp billing & payroll. Roamer|Office girl, good at figures; 5 days. De-|Steno, attr 2? yrs’ exp only, pub relations;|Waitresses, expd; good pay and tips.) CONSULAR CLERKS: Kn Span. .$2600 mA Sheet Writers yarn of references, salary 
Counter girls, cateteria; permanent. Lenox |Linen, 233 Franklin St, Bklyn. EV 9-5850./tecto Scales, 1 Main St, Bklyn 5-day wk: $30. X2654 Times White Turkey, 1 University Pl... _§_| JR. ACCT: Mfg—downtown --$2400 [mechanical or electrical, MANY...Open adres ; La bene. saber. Pees beokd _Erinting i 
H iospit 111 E 76 St Girls, office & messenger work; good oppty;|Office girl, filing, typing, knowledge of |Stenographer, hospital, interesting work; | Window dresser, high salary; steady. Bar-| CREDIT REPORTER: Acctg. ed..$2400 Ipivors’ pressure vessels, structural steel aceress ane phone number. | Compositor, Ludlow and makeup: state «al 
exp-ne exp. Whelan Drugs,/advancement: $20. 14th floor, 247 Park AV.|steno, some bookkeeping; L I C. ST 4-2336 good oppty; lunches included BA483 Times ton's 80 De Kalb Av. Bklyn. Apply 9-12 FHOTOSTAT OF R pepenenees = or oil refinery eqpt to 4,420 jand qualificati xX2614 T 

m 211 \Girls, full-part time, no exp; dwntn dept|Office worker-typist, general routine. Fin-|Steno-typist, general office work; $30, 10. | Women- girls, counter wk. Miss M'Andrews, ric <<. ee 4 pam, r+ Toolroom Supt, experienced to 7,500 Help Wanted—Male Construction, outside supt, handle afters~ 
Countergiris, $2 meals; days, no Sun.jstore. 77 Nassau St. N Y. Miss Wilson kelstein Sewing Machine, 45 W_25th hr wk. Alexander's, 403 E 101 St mise Tower, 317 Washington St, Bklyn 4 DOCK -r = tl : P 340 Production Control-Expeditor, expd.to 3,900 ‘= i ne jtion jobs: r t C26R 
Nic-) 2 St ces Girls, foot-press mach; 40-hr wk, overt./Office workers-beginners! 40 hours, essen-|Stenographer, expert, good appearance; |Woman, to do light assembly work; S0e aTENO —— ort to ; 36.9 Assc mbly Foreman girl = ators Lae rue ony egy _ “4 ae plas overtime Cook, expd; counterman. dishwasher 
Credit, youn lady, expd, know men’s|Laura Hair Nov, 65 Madison Av (27 St).jt ost-wa 730 5 Av (Room 30] ales office: Empire State. T329 Time hour R. L. Polk & Co. 354 4th . eNO: Trans} — ove 72 iChief Inspector, mech-elec apparatus.Open|G'ap! - me pay McG } aurant 
: . ‘ oes I ; ; age je = * . | ; . Wom light s helper ood > 3} JR. ACCT.: Some exper 32 |Expediter-Traffic, man, constn co 1,200) Boy, 330, 40 hrs, generally useful in dress! 
f err K217 Tir |Girls-women, nimble fingers, neat, for cos-|Office worker with some exp; perm posi-|Steno-typist, yng, exp unnec; small office,| Yomen, light canvas helpers; £008 Pay: °| TYPIST: Consular invoices .... $35 [Personnel Asst, young, college grad. .2,600|house. Sylvia Dress, 253 W 26th |Cook-housewkr, 3 adults 
Curtain woman, steady position. Apply| met lab: 5-day wk 231 W 54th ltion. advancement. N ¥ Umbrella. 16 W 32d./pleas. work. cond 450 7 Av, rm. 3401./days; no mach work. 5th floor, 2 South St CLERK: Bill by hand -_ $27.50 ENG NEERS know marine eqpt. tur . - = aundry x 
t e Hall, 145 E 23 St./Girls,” packag’s perfumes, perm; sunny|Qpers for linings, single needle machine; Stenographer; E 11 St; 5 days. Miss Mills, Women, sete, Fountain) Sue art bw no! TRAINEE: Key punch opr Mo $100 bines, pumps, fire control apparatus, |Boys, unskilled, war plant; $28.60 start, Cooks, perm, 
Decorators-for large gift & lamp concern;|surr'd’gs; paid vaca’s. 6th fl, 423 W 5S5th.jsteady, ovtme. Marlow, 55 W 17 St LO 5-5957 experience whelan, ¢ - a 5 RUNNER: Learn advertising $22 gyro-compasses, etc, travel 4-6,000 4 tor 
- oy nt 2 wy san 


Countergirl, exp short orders, sodas, etc, 6)knowl steno; sal open E 
day, $29 reals, tiy Hotel Taf ! Girls, inexpd, for clean bindery work;| Office personnel, clks, typ off girl, un 


Counter girls, 22 
» } 





Ladlow and make-up; cad 


exp or inexp. Good wages!|/good pay. Printline, 22 W 22d yrs; perm. Oakite Prod., 22 Thames St 5 

No Sun President Cafeteria, 120 E 4lst.|Giris, 16, over; full-part time, and after|Office asst, general work; over 30; perma-|Steno, Spanish-English, pharmaceuticals, rapayaen P e PP 

Counter girls, no exp: zd pay, meals, etc;|school, light work. 50 W_19 St, 2d floor.jment. Rudley’s, 1117 6 Av 5 days. State age, exp, sal. X2668 Times.|Ply Brass Rall, 8 Nevins St, Bklyn 
- , - . Ls 


Compositer, all-around; steady. West End 
Print 1144 6 a 

H _ — 
Compositer, 2 thirder, steady pasitie® 


Counter 
165 W 4 


girls 
th (Ro 
Rr S 


s tswe 





148 hrs. U S Elec Mig Co, 2 W 14th iNew We 


t ; I Pau wil Girls, licht work, greeting cards; 5-da wk;|\Office girls, no exp! $23 start; post-war|Stenographer, 5-day week; about I year’s) Women and girls; no exp; full-part time.| SHIPPING-STOCK CLERKS to $40 [IM E’s (1), manage engrg dvipt, (1) re- |Boy, strong, theatrical settings; oppty.|Cooks-broilers-2ds. short 
Decorators, hand painting on figurines,|pert Hall Bros. 7 E 37 St. 4 fi Pature N. A. P. A.. 109 W 64 St experience; $25. WO 2-0925. Apply 8 P M. Schrafft's, 1381 Bway 2 4 ™ comers search, (1) asst to chief Engr, (1) test I. Weiss & Sons, 445 W 45 St | Resta urants ‘ 

expd or learn Backer. 43 W 26t} Girls (16-35). n xp. light factory work:|0 lerks: 5-day week: perm; oppty.|Steno-typist, assistsant bkpr, expd; 5 days,|Women, clericai-stock; full-part time; JR. CLERKS, } 2 ; t. Engr, aircraft or auto engines. .4-9,0¢ 2 Copywriter, technical « ndustriai 
Dental Agency, 250 W 572 St fiygienist=|50¢ ‘hour ‘start ~s W aati _ 85 E 10th newt and 75 Varick Bt NY ee good sail. Kiddie Towne Pats 520 8 Av.|Xmas bonus. Lerner, 354 4 Av (3d fl) SALARIES $20—$23—$25 M E's (5), chem pit maint, layout to 6,000] Boys, stock work, epecwswenrs eppty; vaca- Fea Tel & Radio s 4*~—s =» 
"$5 : a . . Full & After School Openings Specification Writers, power eqpt..4,200; tion, bonus. McArthur, Ltd, 1372 Bway 


¥ =. { r : $30: con .| Women, light assembly; gd pay, ovt; st- = - - ee 
5-day|Stenographer, law office; § competent Le By tg 4 feat Fé St Bkivn SALES DEPARTMENT Calculating Engr, jocomotive eqpt.abt 5,000! Boys, stockroom and errands; 5 days Om-| Cosmetic ; — t air t ca 


DISTRICT SALES MANAGERS: Vita- \M E. supervise test, friction matls. .4,500)nibook Magazine, 76 9 Av, Room 1530. _—|2USE 
to $6080 jElectl Engrs, travel, expd on equip- |Boys, stock; no exp; $24 start; 40 hrs;|©°St estimator. instruments, radic 4 


fl nponents f 


usekeeper, Kenn 
a 





assistants: $2 50 Girls (16-35), bright; $28.60, 48 hrs; “nol Office girls, permanent, 35-hour, : p.. ; 4 
Dental assistants, beginners, $30; exp tolexp, light assembly. Freed. 72 Spring St.|week, $20 start. Mr. Jacoby, 44 Broad St.|280 Bway, Room 526, WO 2-244]. _ ef ra hesia AA 
$60. Marvel Agency, 511 Av (43d St Girls, teach dancing: salary, commission.|Opers, expd on plain hemming; Willcox &|Stenographer-clerical, gen! office routine; |Woman wanted, hand embroidery on s - . a 
Dental assist oppty; part or full time. 334/F i is Cc bus Circle (59th) Gibbs mach A & C Stitchg Co, 242 W 36th j beginner pid; state age, sal. M574 Times. |4nd linen church vestments. K235 Times mins (1) Penn (1) South... 


a cle ieee A 3 ; : : A — - 7 SALES: Food—Upstate : Open ment, motors, controls, etc 4-6,000+iadv. Knox Hat, 417 5 Av - 
Wilson A Bkly GI 2-4927 \Giris, radio assembly work; no exp. Card-|Qperators on Singer machines; $27 start.|Stenographer, expd, 544 days, 40 hours,| Women, part time, assemble cosmetics, gd) coy SALES MGR.: Electr’l.Exp & $50 |Devel Engr, mech, post-war prod.to 10,000} Boys. office & messenger work, good oppty,|COUnter salad man for delicat restaur 
Dental hygienist, midtn office; exec abil-| 52 Sands St, Bklyn le i E 8 St, Sth fi }$28. Adams, 1107 Bway wages ith fl, 67 Vestry (Canal Sta) : PPty near N 3 tead i c21 


ee te de SS : ——— SALES ENGR: Small pumps . $60 jChief Draftsman, punch & dies 100\advcemt: $20. 14th Fl, 247 Park Av stea gd_wag 
$ I fs Girls, factory: steady, overtime, advancmt;|Qpers. off the arm; days, nights; high|Stenographer, experienced, competent, $30,;|Women, 18-40, various positions, photo lab;| jp ZAI Food $35-$40 |Mechanical Draftsmen (4), mining oF [aioe —~ hi 40-h g |Counterman, $50 wk. C. & 
tart, 48 hrs. Saf-T Box, 215 E 22d. |salary. Rextex, 599 11 Av, cor 45 St 5-day week. GR_ 5-5430 no exp nec; many benefits. 370 7 Av (1610)) JR’ SALES: Retail hardware $35 | copper plant exp, basic process lay- |7O%™. Jt Wiveity 65 Madison Av (27 sty [¢tte. 420 Bway. CA 
. St rapher, experienced, some office; Woman, matured, accurate, alert; simple we. i a Se nr ae a out or machinery to 90;°=* - Mass | 2M .._._ 4 At ; —— - 
e 3 . > a tv $ oo. hc pying: 5 days. 1412 Bway, 4 fl, Pers Dept EXEC TIVE SERVIC E CORP. PIPING Draftsmen. many openings. ..80+|Boys, steck room; $25, 5 days; good oppty eee — = eam 
Dental assistant, some exp typing, good'! i Lerne: 44 Av (3d fi $35 wk start Fran-Stef, 23 E 4th * Ww. i : OUR 26th YEAR Machinery Draftsmen 75+(Peggy Hale, Inc 461 8 Av (34 St Whelan Drugs, 15 wa 
pos. 5 a ‘ Girls, assembling picture novelties; expiOpers, 1 & 2 needle set collars; days, oe ee eo om ds ban A gy A si 4 wea ee 7 7. ark ao Detailers, me hl. male or FEMALE. . 40-60] Boys, no exp, assist photo plant; advance- Counter clerks, stock cler 
Dental asst, must be expd, Flatbush, $40 tart i; 39-hr wk. GR 93-2493 night high salary. 599 11 Av, 8th floor APP!) Se aS an i : eee 2 S 4 s FEMALE Tracers, bring samples to 45iment. Apco, 250 W 54ti , sale electrical, Ku 
DE 2. ES y2¢ iGirls, Inexperienced, light pharmaceutical Operators, girls, knowl mach sewing; we Steno, expd, person ble, acets office; 544 Women mec h aptitude; 60¢ hr; over 21; _Partial list Please do not phone Steel or Concrete Designers, local 80 Boy bipnins oo = —-s ont — Countermen, exp 
Denial assistant, 1-6 afternoons; Inexperi-|work: $24; 40 hours; overtime. MU 4-2861.|teach: paid. Mitchell Schneider, 45 W_18.}44y8;_ $35. Roor ae = E an ‘ : va ee 48 hrs se res Xx: “ a ig ys Aye Civ pred, Buy ind exp. Struct! Draftsmen, light steel 65-78] or inl re) rs ; mes -. pp vi pes miwages. President 
need is ME ‘ : ~ - “ " : are week, | Steno-typist, gen o worker; steady posi- omen, light assembly; gd pay, ovt; post- s arts help, to I 7 " yraftsmen. many. local to 80 = — ~ - —21¢ - — 
enced. aE bech new are Girls to learn uindery oe) pene me Operators, better Wouses Apply all tion, rl est firm. 292 Madison Av, Rm 1001.|war: exp unnec. Alvis. 1631 63 St, Bklyn a oe req cost acct, ind exp, for ae Tan Gaetain hospitals as| Boys, aes cee coat factory; good a — ~~ mat 
. sec, ove _— ’ ak en ~ ams : Le eel = - : “ - ta to 30, Ohio $6000 . 4 - pay, overtime riette Coat. 241 W 37th . ? 
one Wilat ‘ ident B4¢ me kivn - - . " Stenographers, beginners; 5-day week; per-|Women-giris, all-around work embroidery . - ? Concrete Bar Detailers, expd 80-90 + 
> iek* ve ye " t ess. Dr Ht oe ae ar nad Ee ae ve mad) yy yh Bey oT Ww 19th: manent P22 start ME 3-0830 factory; oppty. Artstiye Emby, 323 W 38 — ee for paper converter Draitsmen, Srs or Jrs, heatg, ventig Hoys, general office work; full-part time 
entist's ass exp id, note . -| Wali¢ 2 WwW svi & ont y mach -d s : Lie . 4 , mir, Mass, to 42, post-war $6000 . -80|March, 155 E 34 St 
_ idem ie ' SI, 46-5392 ; 7 - . Stenographer, expd, detail work; $35, 5/Young girl ‘or office work; Al references. ‘oy . plumbg or air condtg ; 
= me u ee oe — ~ wih room, ex yx i 17th fl, Gperaters, geee oat Re days ARS23 Ties lApply Peter Bene, 10 W 47 St a ret chain bakery, eee ae Constn Field Clerk, travel, expenses.+52|Boy, general office work, securities; 54\CMtter. make ee oe Se 
sirable positions auto parts opp } ‘ Martinique 2 isteady: vac ons 9 tobes 5 E 335 , - - o— - ravell to 45 Technical Clerk-Typist, local 52| days Sterlin Investing. 42 Bway 266 Wryekoft ’ $k 
bre B. Mc & B, 1221 Bedford Av. Bklyn.|Girls, no exp; good pay; light facty work;|Qperators, Singer, section work, week- Stenographer, exp; 5 days, $30; advemt.|/Young girl, general office work; 5-day OFFICE MGR-ACCT, mdse chain store [c g's, degrees had ow 45, field & office Sn . cin .. = - onl |Cutter and winder, Judelshon machine~ 
Diciaphone operator, full or part time;|permanent Sprinz Bros, 78 W 47th Ipiecework: steady Spitzer, 130 W 17th Plastex, 1085 Washington Av. ME 5-8815.|week. Newton Laundry Service, NE 9-5757. expr, gd acct, to 42 $4500 “om. Gout Anerien . 4,500-6,500 © gt oy ~y tan ee wry e house,| K165 Times 
e000 85 Madison Av (9th f |Girls, wrapping, labeling; Hight, pleasant|Operators “& learners, piece, week work.|Stenographer, legal exp, perm; $35. Rm voang irl, exp unnec; unusual oppty.| ACCT, seeking perm pos, know cost Map Draftsman, expert, artistic Open | 5 ——— ae s AV_(28)-| Cutter expd up & down machine. lade 
Dictaphone operator, expd, textile con-| work; $24. Robbins, 33 W 42d ILilyette Brassiere, 331 4 Av (25 St).|1707, 201 Bway. BA 7-409 _ ally Vache, 6 E 56th : = exc opty, to 40, Connecticut $4200 [ANALYTICAL Chemists, many, foods, ~~ po jecorating, To. ‘ * a ad-|nandbags Mad : ) 
ceeds or aa tendon t Av. |Girls, no exp, H S grads; 5-day; $100 mo|Qperator, experienced on jackets; also girl|Steno, 5-day wk, $40. Doyle Agency, 215 Young lady, Manhattan jewelry store, 9:30-/ ACCT-ASST-OFF MGR, publishing ex- | oils, inorg materials, chemicals, etc.Open|**®nce;_Working papers. Top fl, 218 Mott St.) (oiier assistant, expd Sloper spreads 
Diciaph - to aa eck: some(|start. American Oi! 2'E 424, Rm 2004./to assist’ stamp. Navarra, 552 7 AV Montague St, 5 Beekman St, N Y._ 30; no exp; $25. V1004 Times Downtown perience, to 40, 5 day $3600 |METALLURGIST, aluminum alloys. .8,000}Boy, make self generally useful; opportu-| joy cried sweater 7 SS 
a ewe, Se R | — ~ —t = le . : ° “ Steno, assist public stenographer, 5 Avy;| Young lady, mech inclined; interesting as- COST CLERKS, mfg exp helpful. .$3120 |Chemists, phy or Inorg developmt.3-4,500/ nity. Merzon, 666 5 Av, Man ‘ MN ry A 
exy t e CH 4 12 Girls, 19-40; good pay; no exp; 40 hrs,|Operators, men's shirts, all sections; good/>' 0 Pp ate : , vs , row d PAYROLL-B . r = . > - 
I - f - 4 k “ar ortion pern nt. Revion. 619 W 54tt ay: steady Apollo, 22 W 19th }$35 Mackey Agency, 55 W 42d jsembly wk; good oppty. 7th fl, 44 E 23 st ee Ne BEDE time cards, perm.$2080 jChem, rubber or asphalt compounds.4-7,000|/Boy, oppty learn electric business; perm, 
Jraftswomen, tracers, expd in wor on me; permanen ion, 6 oth. | pay ad) Apo! we vu St xpd cod Gases: Walva: GiatelYar tad heieiiinend. tnerenniiie eal STENOGRAPHER-TYPIST $1560 iCh E, powdered metals . 3,000 advancement. 311 W 40th | 
‘ > Se e< Libe : viris-women, lig assembly work; full-|Operater wanted, nger machine; ood |' » , = ; *. , ~ - , I . CLK, 9: 30-6 Ss : >, : vile *, 000 . ntal techs (7). finishers 
” Girt light - 9 ¢ ~ mi, ~ Operator ws ted Ss h fi cht s lrully ualifications on 118 ~~ Bklyn.jexp nec 7) serienl Ok PE 6 8867 2 ~ MAII CLK 4 . alt Sat, fee pd.$1200 [Ch E's, process or pilot engrg 3 Boys, errands, over 16; part-fall time | De A - 7 = 
ican Imp, 139 Spring § y. 185 Mercer St, 6th floor ful jue s. ‘ ; OFFICE BOYS, sevi, gd opptys, varied |Ch E’s, several, recent grads eyo Room 200. 560 7 Av depts. N. Y. Denta 


Draftswomen, tracers, exp ink’g or detail-/| t time Ame pa —, Y I | . 
bs & Cox, 21 We t.\Girls, light stock work; no experience;|Opers, expd Merrow mach, section work; |Stenographer, exp not nec, 5 days; good/Young lady, assist order clerk, dress house.) TECHNICAL Pharmaceutical Mfg Chemists, 4 500] Roy packing & general work. Pembrooke|OC™%*! mechanic assistant 


brecht’s 104 E 25 St.|good pay, airy workroom. Gross, 61 W 234.|0pPty. Sinclair & Valentine, 611 W 129th./Parnes-Levinson, 530 7 Av CHIEF RADIO ENGINER...abt $15,000 PERSONNEL SERVICE Coat, 252 W 37th jbiaster; state sal. ex K2 


Drees fitters, alteration hand; good salary; |i 1 pay, advance Alt I 
‘ P Unit _ ° - - " ’ onee; 5- Young lady, assist in office; $25 start.) ESTIMATOR & CALCULAT | 
t vl V 2 His Girls, $30 after training as store managers; |OQpers, Merrow, Singer, all special mach: Stenographer, some experience 5-day)? - . ! ACULATOR, hi- 15 E 40TH ROOM 803 Dental mechanic. exc 
Dressmakers-drapers and finishers. Valen-|Bklyn, Quee L I. Kent Stores, FL 3-5000./good pay, plenty overtime. EV_ 8-4080 week; $30. K207 Times S. M_ Rose Co, 43 Debevoise Pl, Bklyn grade machine work Open IGENERAL MGR, greeting cards $10,000 —\¥ — in shipping; oppty Ritemode, | ; inder Dental _ 
t t Girls, hat checking, day-night; $24. OR|QOperators, section work, Singer mach;|Stenographer, expd; also switchboard re-|Young lady, knidge typing; $25 week.) FOREMEN & GEN FOREMEN on naval |PROD MANAGER, candy industry... .High|{™e. 22 A. \Dental mechhnic. Si 
135|/4-2418. Phone morning jsteady work, good pay. Miller, 15 W 24th lief; textiles; 5 days. K192 Times Vogue Hat, 711 5 Ay equipment, kn mach wrk. out-of-city [PROD MANAGER, leather goods ae coal oe 330 WA Sor ght sweepingiiw 47th St 
3 241 I . I » I - : ~ - ~lw : = : . o> BY ECT sacs 7 * 00¢ rad Ww -0700 ~ : 
Girls, no exp, to cut out newspaper clips;|Opers, war work, zigzag & single needle; a ay capa —, office; perm; Toung I Enese photocrapay. | *ypist; MATERIAL Handling Engen aE eee Mg mee sas to $7 pot hae ew as . —_ 
writer, home lay V1031 Times Downtown my work 22 W_ 38th, 6th fl ——— — — —¢ “| —— = “s +_* SUPT, kno razor blade mf; 7 LL yh sg - non e7 0 pt. $2 9a ‘sts . ; " Dr. M. Fe 
: _ -- gon ° ’ - . |9.5: Mae 4, n i $7000 ‘ lo & } $7,000);dept; $24-$26 start 5 8 Av (8th floor 
rime |Girls, learn hand sewing; $26; 40 hrs.|Operators, war work, single needle; simple) enoera battle sar Call GR S277 wa baeryh- | on _ 0 start x 1680 "Tine, Other Technical Opps “ $2600 up ELECTL. ENG RS. cx he =p mare Open ie 17 & en 40 oni mnebine behal ga| Dentist, enpertaness 
Elevator opers, $34, $33, $32, $30, Hj] Advancemnt. Good Value Hat, 19 W 4 St.Jwork. Guild, 4% W_ 37th | = = | — i tay ee PROVIDENT EMPLOYMEN’ ~|ME RS, stress & vibr exp...O : y, 299 W ’ kiyn, | £004 operat erm 
P ‘ B 7 7 ; 2 *, v 4, Ss. s Pp penipay+o t. Bruley, 299 Wailabout iyt 
‘all week All Trades Ager ? St./Girl, interested fashion, take care of clip-|Qpers, feed off the arm & sleevesetting | Stenorrapher, 5 days, permanent. Leviton|/Young lady, expd, for order dept, good) 4» WEST 43 ST 15 Day st |INDL ENGRS. 5 yes” @upel Open Oe a ae = io outs Bein Dentist, ethical; 16-7; nocd 
‘ ' 5 , + ys- ’ _—s iDr. Munz 0 ¥ 


- : “. > M =» “4 ; - 4 , 206h Mfg, 236 Greenpoint Av, Bklyn jpay, infants’ wear 15 W 18th (9th fl) vanen anes 4 - ;. 
Bleciric watt hour meter testers; perm; |ping b ppty 00 Madison, 4th fl. bmac steady. Beifit, 24 W 38th 6 Greenpoin ADVERTISING PRODUCTION MGR. .£4200/TOOL DESIGN ENGRS, 20 to $6,500197 18 Ny " 
ms -lw , > : i ~ 4 ~ : , 2 ‘ o at WINGERS, 4 « 37 $ Norther? l a 16 ‘ ,f 
$45 we K116 7 Girls, no experience. American Telephone|Opers, on plain Singer machines; easy = rpltin emes = real c,d tS women, N ¥ Tel, 214 Wash St, Man.)ADULT mn EPUCATIONAL - RECREATION|TOOL RM & Mach Shop Foremen.to $6,500) 5°, a ae = sessed , ic d 4 Dentist, excellent oppty, good salary; writs 
Elevator opers, 18 up, sizes 12-14; perm.|Telegrapn ¢ 32 6 Ay (near Canal St). jwork. De Luxe Handbag, 535 Bway wy Eamets me 1775 Gr Cone, Bx, 101 Willo'by St, Bklyn.| DIRECTOR, South $3200|CHIEF ACCT, cost plus exp, South. . $6,000 pay, Rhythm. ne we 3 mens; Seaeys SS! particulars. K129 Time 
Mr. Scott, Pa ( Rive Girls! Women! Full, part time, address-|Qperators, expd; steady; good pay; clean,|5!enographer, beginner, 5 days, 40 hrs:/¥¢ ladies, 19-22, h'ndle pub's contrets; exp|ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANTS. .to $3000/DISTRICT SALES MGR, food, NJ.to $6,000 —— an 
Elevator operators, permanent; good pay; ting « lars. Prompt, 104 W_14 nfortable Anhalt. 144 W 27th. $25. Apply 5 Union Square, 4th fi nunec; $25; adv. A. S. Werner, 153 W_72d.|SALESMAN. hotel, rest, food exp Open|SR AUDITORS, internal & external. . High Ee — shipping dept ulty i : 
Hotels McA New est i 7 AveJlG abe kes, ; Mh ’ ; _|Stenographer-tvoist, begnr or expd, 5-dalVoung women, light factory work, costame|AUTO PARTS STOCK CLERK $45|GEOLOGISTS, speak Swed or Chinese. High|™antell, 12 9 Av | c t! 
Fievator operator, ¢ =a high speed, 5 days ‘ Ft ae ee 96 Cooper Sq a yt rae! 4 wk; $25-$35 Call BR 9-2347 for appt.jjewelry: $25. 40 hr 145 W 46 St. Sth fl pe All SALSS High type store. $35 rd REFRIGERATING ENGRS, sev Higt =" soe clerk, warehouse, defense | Dentist, perm, ethical Bkiyn o 
- a ™* ey ed ihe —— i 5 - Stenotype op, 175 w.p.m., or over, perm,|y : : -A-SERVICE MEN, also 4F’s......$30-$40|SALES ENGRS, 3, prec instr to $6,500|clothes. Marlcraft, 151 W 25th : 
r F j 1 Bw Girl : general : office ~ bg! monet | Packers, light ag Sy ar, Oy plant ee nl Ts Fe he me LE 2-5888 a a ee oe a ee CLERKS—vartous $35-$40 |ELECTL GRS (2), constr exp, So.$6,000|Boys, start as messengers; oppty. Rim 1553, | Designers A detailers mech! 
Elliott Fisher bookkeeper; good pay. 400) i 9. Associated Lace, 124 W 36th.|Hamilton Radio, 510 6 Av (14th). 7 . n= 2 : 1 < : ASST BUYER. apparels $35|MECHL ENGR, piping constr, South.$6,000)Port Authority, 111 8 Av (15 St jooreing _& transform = 
Car St Bk CU ‘6-1 N jewman.|Girls, $28.60; light fact wrk; increases ev-| Packer, blouse; 5-day wk; exp umnec.|>¢ck girl, light, easy work; 35 h *|}¥Young women, teach dancing; exp unneces-|MIpNDLE-AGED MEN. light duti WIELECTL ENGR, maint & constr exp. .Open - | NF 165 Times 
I : fants’\ery 60 da. vacation. Camburn, 490 Broome.| piarn y Bl ( 1370 Bway 5 days. Room 1007, 315 4 Av sary, good salary. Dale's, 745 7 Av (49th) TEC NICAL D mL wan ~ $30) . eNGR : , n 5 ¢ Boys, mail room, errands; 5-day; $1,200 Designers, draft n j 
xaminers, floor girls, exp-inexp; infants’) y : tior T 2, = armony tlouse 0 i & - . — : ECHNICAL DEPT UPTOWN PLANT ENGR, ME, superv, maint $5,000 anpum N Y C Hous at? > & kz » oF ame Diesel exp 
~ Petite, 148 W 1 (2d floor \Girls, women, intg wk, termism&ting tele-|Pare girls, yng, perm; Radio City; 5-day; Stock record clerks, $26.40 per wk to start.i\Good typist, assist bookkeeper. Menroe 2W 43 ST INSTR FOREMAN, chem! plant $4,800 __ : using Auth, 122 E 424 janoly Fri or Sat. USE f WN 
File clk, light clerical work; 5 days; temp-|erar Western Union, 4th fl, 60 Hudson.|s97'50 start, Time, Inc, Cl 5-4400, Ext 602.) American Airlines, 103 E 41 St, _N ¥Y_C.|Supply, 1066 Bedford Av, Bklyn. ST 3-4900.\3R MECH & CHEM ENGRS, 21-35 yrs.|AUDITORS, cons'r termination to $5'000 Boy, assist in shipping. Shelbourne Coat!ijesign engineer. ep bydvan 
. tt ‘ F ‘ |Girls, office work; rapid advancement.|pascenatout or binding machine operator Stock girls, no exper necessary; full and) Coll, HS grads, psychology, recreatn. Med’l| fine educational oppty for men interested; METHODS & PROCESS ENGRS. .to $6,000 Co. 200 W_3 st. perm, 00d sal. exce x 
File clerks, experienced; advancement; |Apply Room 317, 20 Broad St, N ¥ C lon lamp shades. Call HA_2-6477 part time. Kayser Stores. Inc, 487 5 AV.) Therapies, near N Y, 58 E 65, today 10-7.) in higher scientific field High|MASTER MECHANIC, 15 yrs’ exp.to $5,200| Boy, alert, packing experience, errands.| Designers, detailers, processors for 
11 : nt K58 Times lGirl, expd invoicing, bookkeeping, typing, Payroll clerks, good at figures-typing; 5 2- Stock girls, 40-hour week plus overtime./Farn $125 mo learning airplane mech, }TOOL DESIGNERS (2) Old Est Co High|CHIEF Chem, waxes, soaps, cinrs $6.000}R'p Studio, 15 E 22 St Ae —|Sive program. Slewek Eng. Hartford . 
fle clerks, bank, state exp, salary. P. ©.| ster good starting sal. Beacon, 71 W 23d.|qay wk. Anchor Optical, 111 8th Av 11 E 26 St, 15th floor. Mr. Dempsey Academy Aeronautics, La Guardia Field. [RADIO TECHNICIANS & engrs....to $9000|CHEMICAL ENGRS, 4, loc South. ...$4,800|/Boys-men, stock, recg; $26.45, 44 hrs, auto-|fesigner, machine or tool: excellent’ pes 
186. Station G. N Y._ |Girls, learn trade; easy work; good pay lSnorell clerk experienced, 5-day week.|5ttaw sewer, expd box & small machines. instruction—Ffemale MECHANICAL & Methods Engrs... to $8000 ASST PLANT ENGR, maintenance...$4,200;matic increases. Lerner, 354 4 Av, 3d fl. war y. Mutoscope. 44 lith St 
Fi ; a onl7 §35: 5 dave, Coben’s| Wildman, 1808 Pitkin Av, Bklyn Henry Rose Stores 360 W sist Florence Reichman, 1 W_57th ens ________|DRAFTSMEN, juniors & seniors. ..to $6000|COST ACCOUNTANT, dtwn .- -$4,000|Boys, all depts ladies’ apparel! 40 hrs.| Designer. machine — 
ile clerk, expd only. ; 5 days. Cohen’s — Sorte au ees : = . — |Switchbd oper., plug; office wk; 5-da wk; Beauty Culture TEXTILE ENGRS & CHEMISTS......Open|JR Mech! & Electl engrs, post-war...Openjovertime. Perlman-Diamond, 240 W_37th.|oortanity: tend nniase et Post-war on 
Optical, 117 Orchard St Girls, stock work and ag gy ae clerk, accurate figures and typing 9-1 or fulltime Schoenfeld, 333 W 52d —~"BANFORD ACADEMY CHEMISTS & Chem Engrs to $8000/JR ACCOUNTANTS, cost exp ‘ CpenMices, Gealaness, msctlen-gleiive oo: E-dasian unity: good salar al £139 Tx 
File clerk, expd; 5-day week. Call Miss|/¢Welry, #0 howl 2. Fm ws, vi 5 AV:iPrentice Hall, 70 5 Av. __ a a eH } TECHNICAL DEPT, DOWNTOWN ACCOUNTANT, advtg agency........$2,600|wk ‘630 9 Av (44th). 5th floor : | Desig » tool, post-war: overtime-racs- 
Miller. EV 8-4¢ Girls, artistic work; paid while learning,|Payroll clerk, good salary. Canteen Co,|5Witchboard relie oe" a of Hair and Beauty Culture 15 DEY ST ONLY JR DRAFTSMEN & Tracers Open] &>-~ io ch ; ee tion. 11 : 
© clerk, expd; good oppty; large mfr n wigs. Mary Brosnan, 151 W_ 26th./314 E 23 St, N ¥ C days. Detecto Scales, 1 Maine St, Bklyn - b- Mit ne FOREMAN. machine shop $6000|LABORATORY ASSTS,. Jersey City.. .Open| 30%; to check bills & general office work.posigners & detzilers, automatic mach'es 
tor. 285 Mad Av, 17 1\.)Girl, shipping clerk, light packing; $31.20) Personnel, 2 opgs exec off, typing-record Switchboard "" plug; 5 days; $27.50 Cc Pe oe ye Ss INSPECTORS, Ist, 2d, 3d class ‘to $4000/STENOS & TYPISTS . Open America Factors, Ltd. 341 Madison Av ost-war; estab firm. N ¥ K1i3 Tom 
tart: 48 hour 8th floor, 160 Varick St.ikeeping: 5 days. W. T. Grant, 1441 Bway irresistible, 100 Prospect Ay Poe 3s 28 years’ experien “e "famous for success- SEAL yt te electl, mech!.$3600/CLERKS, young or middle-aged._-_.. Open ~t fy ty is'Sti a3 Designing engrs, expd mechanical, mack 
zo0d nd 0 ext 8 |Giris, cosmetic factory; light work; good| Ph, 4 a > good pay,|>Witehboard plug expert; 5-day; ess, a oan PERSONNEL ASSTS, job evaluation. $3,000 EVELYN ARTZ - — ss - and product design | fi z 
Rg gg ag ge alary: overtime. Zimmerman, 404 4 Av lite tay visti Fang PE se ae coat exp; excellent pos. _V537_Times ag — pt Fy ---8-- SALES ENGINEERS. trainees to $3000 331 Madison Av (43d), Room 804 ae (2), 16-18, messngs, exee office, wat Die designer, plastics, metal forming. per- 
plus bonus start. 4th fl. 11 E 235tt Girl, errands, clerical, make self generally Photographer, portraits; young man; work Semeane Core eee? Be ee Day and eve complete or brush-up courses a gg ge TECHNICAL AGENCY Stas -=_< f= S-Say-to 30,508 plant ot perm Reeves, 62 = aren ‘}:|manent; Wheeling, W Va X27 Times 
File clerk, pleasant surroundings, midtown| US¢ful, 5 days. Room 703, 20 W_ 47th out of city. Call PL 8-3058 } oppty PP Mig, IU. All ages, individual instruction at easy o4 Nassau St. New York City MEN, 2, 21-28 yrs, train for inside y, publishing, errands, make self gener i Die, tool, gauge makers, Ai, helpers 4 
ea: 5-day ¥ no exp née Ki62 Times.|Girls, full-part time; learn jewelry busl-|pinkers, expd on women’s dresses; steady|i¢lesraph messengers,  full-part time-jterms. Visit or write for free 50-page Arch designers, good firm to $5,000 outside contacts $185-$200 jally useful; $20 weekly. K228 Times pay; post-war ; aft . : 
= : Te = — | . 1 Ff OF ° Weste Ini 22 n , 3 AV ‘ } » shop."’ Arch draftsmen (50) , ART_ ASST, beginner to $35 5 6G | 
Fi ——e eg "page Dale Carol, 31 E 27 St work Ladycraft. 1400 Bway Western Union, 422 E 149th, near book, “My Own Beauty Shop . raftsmen good firms High Asst, Ls "1 : Boy for stock room; 5 days, 40 hrs; $26/Diemakers, excelient condition 
—— — —? 7 3 ” | Girls no experience; 5 days ~ 46 hrs | Plastics “male or female learners; good Telephone oprs, hotel exp. Miss Waters,/1465 BWAY, cor 42 ST. PHONE WI 7-2220 Ko 4S -faedcateany —§—» < Industria? sart,_sévet, parm 243_W 17th (1ith fl) lsubways. Pu : M . = 
3 7 3 : : 7 4 : Hotel Park Crescent, 87th-Riverside AN EXCELLENT PRESENT & FUTURE), 200° OPportunity Salary high = =e ~|Boy, errands, light packing-receiving; 5) fh . 
AY AJ (LLE! OSE! - , ’ ’ ishroom, potwashers ‘fee men 


le clerk i bard work cod 150. Epstein, 242 4 Av salar Jey Mfg, 16 W 22 St ! ‘ mae al . _ —— 
vue a Bee * foie — 4 “ hae lGiris. no exper as information clerks.|p — ‘ 4 i i t Rerkshaw Telephone information operators, 18-30; MARINELLO + mg = Fr des (20), bidgs to $4,500 PRINTERS, COMPOSITORS, ete. Appl jdays Lustberg Nast, 212 5 Av around men , . ‘ 
£ f isd ’ . : iPresser, hand, cleaning store e ha $28. Greyt 4. 10-3. 242 W 34tl SYSTEM OF BEAUTY CULTURE lumb, heat, air-cond draftsman Highle . = . hd / : 
Piling clerk, expd, publisher's college dept.| Miss Haviin Dixie Bus Depot, 241 W 424 \Cieaners, 706 Pelham Pkway, TA 9-9111 40 hrs, $2 sreyhound, 5, 232 J f pal A Piping drafts (50), high-pressure..to $4,800 Graphic Employment Agency, 161 W 2) Boy, to assist mechanic. Albin Sewing Ma-/ Dishwashers, porters 
‘ r ' Girls, handbag factory; 37% hrs, overtime, Production clerk, experienced in type shop Pelephone operator, part time; temporary Can a... os og Lo re). ini Elec draftsmen (20). light eas ‘ion " ip Want M ' chine, 22 W 25th | good sala : 
Pingerwaver, manicurist; excellent salar; j}vacation. Carlin & Freed, 12 W_ 2ist Leventhal. 229 W 28 St EN 42-6033 - CO 5-3896 Beautiful New Modern School.|Designers and dyaftsmen, machinery or elp anted—Male Boy, errands; inside work; 5 days; $22. | Dish washers-porter, day and aight. Bikers 
<4 - mm ar I eters on-defense 4 bra: lo - ; - Telephone operator, multiple board experi- Mom : : : mechanical devices -——~ - - - Barrie, Morell & Co, 36 W 47 St Food Shops. 309 West % 
y week. ¢ ; }Girls, light factory, non-defense; 48 hrs;|Proofreaders, beginners, CPA firm; state : . - e ica Ices : High/ A tant i a! d la | ‘ 
a ort @98 BN f+ oi Qe ¢ AO Var . ~ - J ey (ence Sears Roebuck & Co, 360 W jist BEAUTY culture, good pay; day-night.) “ pho Accountant, ree coll grad, tax dept TEC) Boys-me a t lant. 40 h a 
Sinrerwave silearound, short houre Al 28 apid tn h fl, 160 Varick jage educ, salary P1068 Times Downtown.|® Free B let TT. Established 1893 Salesman, chemical co, contacts. .to $7,500 corp, CPA exp pid R981 Times Dwntwn ys nm, drug mfg plant, rs + over-| Dishwashers, porters, steady work qned 
"S400 © r mryT 8.4 Girls, light fact work: no experience . , Telephone operator, plugboard, expd, ad- ree Booklet AEIESG ISUu. FOREIGN POSITIONS — —_— — time. Mr. Hughes, 26 Cooper Sq (E 5Sth).|wages. Apply En 
& { 1132 M A t 8.9201 rirls, gh actory wk; no expe Radar assembly work. Western Electric Co, - - a » ROP & Moler System, 112 W 424 , —_ Accountant, natl org; good future for yng raf_— = 
vertising agency; 544 d. Rm 1002, 527 5Sth.|/ ? ——|Marktg assists (under 35 yrs) Open . p Boy, $25 week; also part time. Apply Cen-|Dishwasher, no exp req for neal and 


- - — ~ bap.) bedford Dress Cc 1385 Bway 1529 W 42 St. N ¥Y C. Apply dall to 4:30 >, 20: e 44% 

ramamere: Derm work, with overtime. Per-|\ (iis, light factory. exp unnec; 5 Gaya, @0|n ai o-hreczpdcloeced; war werk; | Telephone operates for relief & filing in| Business Schools __.|Warehse 4 storagemen (to 45 yrs) ..$3.500+-|/P2" Personne! Per ath fi, 305 E th ltury Letter, 110 W 47 St |worker. Huyler’s, 28 5 Ay 

A ae ae | ‘ io i 1) $22. Federal Watch, 129 Fulton St Rat eee ald Radin 140 Lafayette st (2dvtg agency; $30 per wk. K33 Times STENOGRAPHER-1TYPEWRITING Accountants, speak Spanish. ..$3,600-$4,800 a rR = a. only. I.lpoy, 16-17, stock clerk; pawnshop; 60|Distribuiors, wearine apparei 

Bath rene Galen naks th Ae” |Giris af counter] Be exp; geod pas. Me-lk-ae j Telephone operators, day-night. See chief COMPTOMETER OPERATOR Accts & clerks, jrs & srs (to 45 yrs)..Open|#vVid Greenberg, 14: ay NX C.___lexp. Bruder, 860 Columbus Av (102d |5-day wk. Henry Rose Stores. 

Pimaasarn : a, -" : ~ ws |G Restaurant, 48th & Bway oe QM yg ~~ hy —_ operator, Hotel Lincoln, 8 Av-44th Day-Eve. Open to 9 P. M. mining foremen, electricians and Diesel poceeeease Saar poe CPA firm. Write Boys, full, part time; addressing, sorting|Drafiting teacher-architectural 
nigners, €xpG On Gresses 2 ., - — ~~ ~- . gooc pay, ove a s ae Telephone operator, expd; steady; meals. DELEHANTY INSTITUTE mechanics to $3,606+}5 503, 12 Eee ' o Ww “ he mee architectural 

Sth 1 |Girls, no exp, gen clerical work. Roamer) pai assemblers, wirers, solderers, inspec- H spital, 559 Prospect Bh uxiwn. ” 120 W 42 St. Near Bway. ST 9-6900. Pipefitters, brick masons, carpenters, elec-|Accountant, office manager, mfg expe- cirewars. Prompt, 104 W_léth ung Classes. Write DS6s 


- - —— - jLinen, 233 Fra n St, Bklyn. EV 9-5850 war niat m. 510 : . . - — 746 Boys-men, stock & receiving depts; no exp/ Draftsmen & t s. e ; 
ro et, Semmens apyere: © Saye 40 brs. war plant; days. Hamilton, 510 6 AV.le ity pisis, $125 mo start; good fut. East-|90-14 Sutphin Bivd. Jamaica. JA 6-8200| tricians. insulators, millwrights, Dieseljrience, complete charge. CA_6-7461 nec. 5-day. Henry Rese Stores. 360 W 1st tail samples nec. Gibbs ~y: “a 


/Girls, light packing; holidays, paid vaca- — i : ; : : oO s, Diesel 4 “hy? ; . . - 7m i ] 7 w 
: - . ~-f Fg a BF ptionist for photographic studio; exp. - G . COMPTOMETER Operation: Secretarial pers, esel and tractor mech'cs, crane/Accts, srs, semi-srs, jrs, for CPA firm; state ‘ 
ns: $25 start. Fuller, 207 W 25th ==-<5,|Delma Studios, 521 5 Av. : ern _Alriines._ Hangar 81 ste ae re Placement Service: VSwitchtoerd Central] Pers. machinists, truck dispatchers (27- edue, exp, sal. R1045 Times Downtown Boys, strong, help mechanically. Zierick\Drafismen, layout sheet 
Girls, do you like to draw? Salary $22-$24/ poo otionist, 5-d wk; exp pid. Lincoln Stu- eet CH "4-800 . . Speed; $5; 3 Types PBX _Switchboards. —#_ 72)... ou. $4,368 Accountants, jrs, expd; perm; good oppty; B light k 3 t, full ti 
ES SU Tes CENTRAL SCHOOL WALL ST, 25 BEAVER state details. M420 Times oy, carry light packages; part, full time 
eee Cee ee eee See eee Wane (6 Ay) BR_9-7928.| 2 BLOCKS BELOW WALL STREET |Accountants, srs, jra; perm: siall CPA, 
Bee 2 . 4o me Aw lerk; jon: Sx . llo f . : x . - 7 d . Ss, jrs; 3 . -| 
Floor girls and cleaners on children’s|> to 10 ca ¥ Pub 7 : a a2 a 210-) ork Hospital, 530 E70 St. ¥yplat-elock an kt —— aa COME, OBSERVE, SPEAK TO PUPILS) |. PR a yg state educ, exp, sal. P1069 Times Downtown —_ ans | a” ge work, 5 days; Draftemen, machinery builders desire expd 
sportswear. Spitzer Sportswear, 130 W 17t bee Dre Con. we ae Registrar, | college graduate, _thorthand, lth floor 164 Duane St ~ STENO & TYPE IN 6 WKS. Sa PCLERK n “see Stvegsfacet. expd jr, CPA firm; splendid oppty.| 5... aaa Wanad wie ae eT a aa Yb: ; Rt Ee 
Floor Firls, ne exp necessary. De Luxe| is wlth artistic ability, train for career? |e eee anne eer clack |Typists, essential industry, post-war opply.(120 w p m. No symbols, uses ABC's |STATISTICIANS (3) ae pi cite_fully, salary. RICH) Simes_DOWOR. Ie tite Library, 43 St & @ Av, Room 210.|mach exp: perm Rinne kee ee 
H 3 Bway, near S; , virls with artistic ability, tra Bn }|/Reservation clerks, also voucher clerk. Eimer & Amend. Greenwich & Morton Sts |Speedwriting, 274 Madison (40). AS 4-7200|MULTILITH OPER. Sal > s>|Accountant, jr, certified firm; state quali- ys jmach ex} ‘ . 
Food checker, expd NCK; 0 PM-12.|>_ 087s: $22-$24 s 370 7 Av (1612) \Park Central Hotel, 56 St-7 Av. ~ ‘aie ; o a We ei GOTHAM SCHOOL OF BUSINESS FRT FORWARD CLK. shipment.: gpojiications, salary. R984 Times Downtown Boys, = P ee oe time; timelock|Draftsmen (dsgnrs), struc, concrete, eler 
ta ts, 254 % 1. Room Girl, Irn key punch & tab mch, short train-|Restaurant help, full-part time; no exp ‘oi ged - USES, 10 x 40th daily to 5. Shorthand, typing, comptometer oper./B/L freight forwarding ee $25|Accountant, jr, for C P As; state age, a ee acme nee aii; —_ svealanlieatt : ae . Eba 
4 . A 1. 4 re ’ ‘ 5 ry al j aftsaman-designer, expd 


Dental assistant-secretary wanted Kll4 
Time Girls, clerical, stock; fuli, part time; Xmas|Qperators, leather goods; 5 days, 40 hrs; 


K211 , 


ICPA desires capable assi«t 
}details sal. ex; 








Dental lab, boy Irn dental mechanic trade 
Harry Hewel, 1 N . : 


Dressmakers, exp, good pay Dieppa, 
I . Sr t 4 ‘ 

Editorial assistant, headline 
fur . . re ' 


Routing Dentist, ; experienced 2 





" Dentist, exp operater, excellent 
Sette of . 


lary hours si : 4 





Om S01 =m i9 


Solar & Ca Z 
File clerk, switchboard relief permanent Biv 
| “a PF {y 


Bile 





acneraily ssetai 








- § metal 
-—iCorp, 385 Gerard Av. Bronx templates. Bridge Metal 201 F ‘ 


F St 


2 I rt | 
Finishers, expd, custom-made work only.) 

| Draftsmen, expd, small mechanisms o re- 
Room 704, 566 7 Av dio Bell Labs. Washington & Bet - 2 - 


z : 


Floor girls, light work, finishing ladies’|*°!** tra ning; 5 days 370 7th _(161: | dios, 89-43 165 St, Jamaica, NY Mr Otis 
underwea La Rosa W 191! Girls, 15-19, part time 9-12 or 1, I or 2-5,/pecord room night clerk; salary open. New 
) 


wz 





. — ng al, perm. 1412 Bway, 4 fl, Pers Depticcnrat a i freight , A a 
Florida, fare pd; photographic retoucher,|)"#:_84 541, perm. 1 Bway, 4 PiiSchrafft's, 386 Fulton St, Bklyn. : > bookkeeping; rapid training; days, eves |MARGIN CLERK a g55jeducation, exp, sal. R1052 Times Downtn " a amall siupinn, 
¢ exce t V519 Times Girls, a + ¥ |e a days, 40 hrs:|Retoucher, steady position; oll tintings — cermanent Wi's-0500, Ext 23. |! 5 Fifth Av (42d). VA 6-0394. ACCOUNTANTS, all ‘grades’ ..”’..'g00-478| Accountant, cortitiod, (Pa); estar $4,506 work Triangle tn Fintbush av. Biya wars —F ner, expd, smal 
« ral office work. chance for t Is tart 0 E 13t ri oor Ca PL 8-3000 ners; 5- Ext 22 on Terra « BANK clerk, for all depts .$60|Nat'l Employment (Agcy), 30 Church St.|B8oys, mall room; ays. Mr ckermaS,|Drafisman, mechanical, expd refriaeeaila 
genera ico werk, chance for begnri Oe eee e —acilve, sacl oinik yous meee chipping clke- Yloor girls amali|Typists, clerks, file élerks. Western Elec- MOON SC HOOL Secretarial) WOon- HOPKINS 7800 D a's bigs” See oe ag Cha ie: oe ch st Irving C. Krewson Corp, 225 W 34 St. and air-conditioning 1 rea 7 ration 

Balch-Price, Fulton & Smith Sts, Bklyn plaster figurines. 28 E 22d, 9th floor tric, 100 Central Av, Kearny, N J Ready in 6 to 8 wks; also refresher courses UNDERWOOD BOOKKEEPERS $40lgeier Agency, 1472 Bway (42 St) Boy,office work & errands, full time, perm,| Draftsmen, layout and detail. Apoly dally 

Typists; good pay, full, part time. 2d fi, Day, eve. 521 5 Av, MU 2-1820. _—s/EXPORT clerks and typists 3 yo. E, gd wages. Mr. Pastore. 200 5 Av, Rm 734.\to 6 P M. 1 Audubon A an . 
7 ° , . se he ad — _— —— — 


da 


Giris-women, counter wk, no exp nec. Miss|123 W 64th, 7th fl. ==———S——C—S—SSséd'taty. Blue’ Kitchen, 79 Chambers St 47 West St (near Rector St} SPECIAL course basic typing; 1 month.|MAIL CLERKS | tsseees advancement. CA 5-3884 Boys, learn trade, easy work, good pay.|Dftsman, engineer, grad, 1 yrs cap mack 
Kanuk. White Tower. Rest’rts, 731 8 Av.|Hair stylists, 2; expert; 11 A M to 8 P Mis; ands ama” a rs: high-class;|2 7Pists, address envelopes, full, part time; Shorthand, Typing, Private ORDER CLERKS, brokerage —— a oo oo -|Weidman, 1808 Pitkin Av, Bklyn lparts & tool design ED 4 ; 
4 ample hands and drapers; high-class; |) nomewkrs Novelty Letter, 1214 Bway.|/Grace Callahan, 120 E 86th AT 9-4965.| MESSENGERS to 70 years $27 up a «ee eee CPA; Boy, errands, assist shipping. $23, good! Draftsmen, mech & stroct & stress ners 
ae Ho Acronis ee cee 
- . : . = : ; ——- |OF FICE BOYS. exce 23\vancement; na irm. O46: mes ’ ‘ , ; we y; |Draftsman, sr, layout, ciectronics exp pias 
ts Head of stock, lower-priced dresses. Mar-|Seamsiress, residential hotel. Apply House-|19P!st, part or full time, hrs to suit STENOGRAPHY -trenscription, weekly tul-|OFFICE Boys eet AY 23 Accountant, junior, CPA firm; $150-$175,|Teferences. CI _7-5823 post-war possibilities. | onics exp pid 
is hire 501 Fulton St, Bklyn lkeeper, Hotel Berkley, 74 St & Amst Av.|(2417)_ 330 W 42d LS On hh = CPA-ATTY, to 45, Al type to $15,000|accordingly; perm. R1063 Times Downtn.|Boys, some exp electronics; gd sal; steady; |Drafisman, detail small electro-mechanioal 
} time; no exper|Secy-steno, exp, gen office wk; midtown;|!¥pist, good at figure perm; excellent oo ASD 2ece iN $0), AS at 9 |TAX ACCTS, Al types .to $12,000]Acct, 3 yrs recent public acetg exp Glo-\Pleasant. Boetsch Bros, 221 E 144th |parts. Federal Labs, 67 Broad 
ppty, advancement 57 St, 6th fl. |Speedwriting, 274 Madison (40). AS 4-7200 MDSE, sal nat! hrdwe firm $7.000|versville; good oppty; USES. 10 E 40 St,|Boys for office; 40 hours; permanent; $23.|Drafismen, design detailing, layout. exper 
y, 9 Typist and general clerical worker; small) General —___.|Prodn Mgr, apparel exp, 200 m NYC. $5,200/Accountant, office manager, pharmaceut-|Miles Shoe, 345 Hudson St. __ : store fixtures. FS211 Time 
Se cient elles cals bc cual gommome. BL. Polk & ¢ 354 4 Av, 12th fl.lope Rockwood & Co, 88 Wash Av, Bkiyn pleasant office _ jt Beer Bet . TRAIN TO MODEL TEXTILE DESIGNER, narrow fabrix.$5,200lical mfgr: good oppty. R1041 Times Dwtn.|Boys, usher staff!! Good pay, nice hours |Draftsmen, metal cabinets, war work 
oF pts Northe Assu e, 135 William St Hostesses a waitresses, neat, attractive | Secty-steno, expd volume advtg prod’n, coll 46 hrs: Soy ys Texa0n9 —" Barbizon's attractive course will qualify eat Sarit neon te ten mee rod ye Accounting student under 19, office of natl Rm _403, Capitol Theatre. 1639 Bway. __ = Lab urn : 5 No Bive 
Girls, light factory work; good pay, over- iffer’s Emp Dept, 346 Lexington Av. jgrad, 5igda, essen, oppty, $50. K222 Times T T Fri, 3-7 P M,|You for superior modeling positions STENO. y . : OM ICPA firm: advancement. K167 Times Boy, pack dresses, make self generally use-| Draftsman, lighting fi 
time Mohawk Bag. 20 E 12 S |Hotel clerk, expd switchboard; days; nojSecy, biol research lab; $140 mo; college HY wey ah gvane = 13982 Times. Free Placement Service CLAIM’ Adtnaten yee ag ot : . Advig account execative, secure accounts, ful. Luckey Style Dress, 1400 Bway lEdward F. Caldwe 1 . 
Girls, no exp; $30 after training as store|''@nscript. Hotel Willard, 330 West End Av | ses free. Ki85 Times eel = ——4 oa ee Budget Plan—Day-Evening Courses CLERK caant oo ey Sere aw 7 young live wire. X2277 Times Boy for packing, light factory work; steady|Draftsman expd elec circalis, mech design 
mers. Rand Cleane 4201 4 H, Bklyn.|Hotel cashier, N C R. Apply auditor, Ho-|Secretary, technictan, expd, for doctor's Typist, 5 days, 40-hour week, $24. PL Visit our studio today or write for ACCTG Cl CRKS ri on rm .."gi7s|Advtg all-round copy, layout. Yng, sea- job; good oppty. 156 E 42d, 6th floor jessential Mr. Meiser £% 
Girls. light assembly: full-part time; $29.75,|tel Shelton, 49th & Lexington Ave [agin to week. X2693 Times 5-6850, ext 25 ss Fo “ Free Illustrated Booklet 5 CLERKS learn export A gg "St. $30 soned. Perm, executive oppty M544 Times |Soey, office work, 5 days; $21.50, advance-|Drafismen, plant layout work Rock weed 
: Chen . , 7 Typist-monitor beard oper; steady position BARBIZON STUDIO OF MODELING |rerreRs. note/coin \t0 $481 Alrbrashes, expd, figurines? geod pay,| ment, future. K119 Times |& Co, & Washington Av. B 


etic 76 9 J l Hotel help, checkers, maids, waitresses,|Secretary-bkkpr, steady pos Engineering |‘ - . : ; E a. 
Girls, $28.60+ bonus; 48 hours. Generalj¢levator oper. Victoria Hotel, 7 Av-51 St.|a& Research Co, 29-28 41 Av, L I City vational, 198 Mott 5¢ (Canal st) 576 5 AV (47th, NY BR_9-9156-T._ | RECEPTIONIST, to 50 yrs, bank $40]overtime. Backer, 43 W 26th Boys, men, 5-da week, stockwork; perm.|Draftsman, marine, must have experiems 


‘ ; ( t station.|Hotel help, bathmaids, chambermaids &| Secretary, i to 5, 5 days; real estate; state|!¥Pist, expd, chance advance; liberal sal- WOMAN PAST 45 AND YOUNGER ACCURATE, 18 E 41 ST. Aircraft riveters, buckers, assembl’s, nights,| MO"tgomery Ward, 75 Varick St 12 fl. __|X2196 Times 
Girls. assemble cosmetics, ¢d wages; perm,| € $32 erm. Delmonico, 61 E 59th./age, salary K239 Times 


Girls, over 16, deliver telegrams Western| - a. 
Union. 127 W'40 St (east of Bwa Girls, light work, steck room; 48 hours./Saiad girl, $30; closed Sundays; holiday 





=f 


jHand addressers, experienced; good rates.|Sample nand on evening gowns, expd. ‘ JITION—AL Business Sub 
| : j ; : ays. S ~272 ABBE INS ITE, 169 NV ¢ 
overtime advance.| 00m 804, 254 W_ 54tt /Harlene Frocks, 1385 Bway (23d fl) = ST_4-2728 \BBE INSTITUTE, 1697 BWAY (5. 


) AY 


jiris, light tacto o “hours, $2 jor 1 P M to 10 P M. Miss Titus, 693 5 Av.|permanent: good le %_9-2209 - . es: cts. |CAG 5 as, | 
ce Dene Demy Sates SS Ramee, UELSe. Se ent: good salaries. BR 0-2 \Typist, clerical, young, knowl bkkpg; s EARN TUITION—All Business Subjects. CAGE. P-S, stock record, trans, dividend 





ris, exp unnec; bonus; 
Heid 13 Hudson, cor 1 
Girls, S26 wk rt, bonus, ex unnec ‘ 
Ae ark Plug, 438 Hudson r Morton.|Help, all depts, full-part 
Giris, colored, white, factories; good pay.’ P Office, Saks, 34 St-Bway.| %-day, 48 hrs; $140 mo. K175 Times 

. je Ag 2 W_125t |Homeworkers, type address envelopes atiGecty to plant supt; 5-d wk; some exp; sal 


Pet nel 


xtures expd. Aoper 


aaié 


ary. Sunshine Art, 115 Fulton St, N ¥ C.l yoy can qualify for good hotel, club pons ADV PRODN Asst, thoro exp $3,120/aireratt Bronze, 43-02 38th. L I C Boys, over 16, carry communications. West-|Draftsmn, elce dsners, pow plant. sabes. 
‘is } A l, 67 ¥ : Cana ta).|Housekeeper (working), 160-room hotel. |Secty-steno, 5 ~ day; $35-$40. Fulton ete cra ob ey good Day. a NN ee tae oo nae on —s wa'ses Aircraft mech, Westchester airport; €.A.A. ie Union, 40 Broad St a Wail . j ind plant lay’t & dsg — 
Gir idler os olive —_ a i salary K142 Time lAgency, 93 Nassau Miss ley, : s 100 oppor ies. Spe ye. S. undergrads ¢ , some e 84g Th " oys. work hour or more fore school. | Draftamen, or - 

irls, let ¥ ene ey Inventory control clerk, knowl of bkkpg.|Secretary, capable; permanent positon; Typist, pleasant working conditions. Pito-| Placement service, no extra charge. west INVENTORY man. travel.” Expenses+$35 HR ee eee tinea Western Union, Rm M-5, 60 Hudson St. |future’ Detects Senha On ee 
Giris-women, factory work; exp unnec;|Reliance Textile, BA 7-6941 midtown area; $140 mo. DX686 Times | meter Log Cp, 257 Lafayette (ae_Spring) sche i Desk 134 Washington D c om MERIDIAN AGENCY, 233 W 42 ST. lanod, ptg “General Bronze. 43-02 38th. LIC |Boys, genl duties, packing, stock; good|Drafismen, jr-sr, mech. struct. detalline 
$36.60 start: 6 days. TI [790 Inventory control clerk, knowl of bkkpg.|Secretary-steno, expd, capable; good pay;|1JPist-experienced, general office. 5 d wk,|SCU0U%, y t ic ~~ ,emmeeeas Directors of lab. chem or phctl 2.to $13.000/47 ott helpers & expd machinists, day &|22Y: Steady. 636 11 Av (46th), 6th fl. |good pay. Babcock & Wilcox, & Liberty 
Girl, high school grad, knowl chemistry: |Reliance Textile, BA 7-6941 plendid opportunity. 370 7 Av. 12th f./¢xcell salary. 15 EB 26th, 7 fl. ___ Soe eenee_., Engrs. air-conditiong refrg mfg. to $10.000/ night shift: 50 hrs. Klumpp, 305 £ 46th.|Boys, no exp, light factory wk; 55e hr;|Draftsmen, tracers, exp ink work om cloth 

sal P - : yaa : : Typist-filing clerk, $23, 5 days, 40-hour|JOB floundering? Helen Trimpe, Careers|Bookpr acctnt-office mgr, cosmetic. .Open overtime. Art Crayon, 5601 Ist Av, Bkiyn.| Design Service < 120 Liberty s ‘ 


: 


day He tt Dept 


a sal. Propy ] i44 Dr, LI < j\Jewelry wax inspector, expd. Princess|Secy-steno, attr sal; asst to exec officers-|"°* -- . a ‘ - 4 = oe “ - Artists, layout, ste-ups, movie programs; | 
Girls, clerical & Monitor board, 5 day wk.|Jewelry, 126 W_ 46 St | k: Yonkers resident pfd. X2730 Times.|¥eek._Phone WaAtkins Amir for Women, 42_Madison__MU_2-0253._ inten Mere 3. } —— ee are — steady Offset Programs, 653 11 Av (48 St).|Boys-men, with mechanical exp; sood|/Draftsman, chain store exp: advance. Mf 
te salary. WZ886 Tim«e |J P ion; dings;|!3pists, good oppty; S-day week. Inter- Sal Help Wanted—Female agg ty 8 — — starting salary. Blu Strike, 207 W 25th. |Stellis, ST 4-3200 Loft Cand 
2 I }Junior clerk, messenger, exc position; )|Secy-steno, expda; pleasant surroundings; | tional Tailoring Co, 12th-4 Av. 9th fl ales eip ___|Sales, drug 4, cosm 2, food mers 2..High|Artists to paint on metal, glass, crockery j 
Girls, factory; 5is-d wk, salary $33; 5)>-day week. Room 2016, 2 Park Av jgo0d_oppty. U.T.C., 150 Varick (nr. sub.) | Siressing. tiling’ t +-fuli| Adv phone. solicitor, newspaper; 5-day, @0/Sales, war vet, drug. groc, exp pfd..$200/M. Stanley Jones, 451 Bway Boys, yng men, war work electro plating; |Draftsman, thor exp precision mach & inal 
nights, $40. Lewyt, 401 Wythe Ay, Bklyn.|Key punch trainees; Remington Rand; $84|Secretary, for society magazine; Iinterest-|/,>P!® ‘soo “7 - P.. A T1087 “fee lhours; $24 and bonus. X4010 Times. — M E plant mgr 2, methods 1........High|Artist, greet cards, highly skilled in both] [0 ©*P: 40 hrs. 142 W ldth, 7th ff drawing; post-war. ST 44 
Girls (col, white); $27, $35 in few wks;|month; 5 days; insurance firm. AL 4-4662./ing position; $25. PL 3-6147 . Frpkt Re Ne : -|Bakery salesgiris, few hours daily, few|Engrs, Ch E, E E. Indl, ete ....Open|humorous d& gen'l designs. X2612 Times.|Boys, light packing & shipping, steady, 5) Draftsmen, war work; excel peacetime fa- 
plant. Kent, 135-32 Roosevelt Av, Flu g.|\Key punch oprs, expd, 545 days; advance-|Secty, labor rel, personnel, 27-32, midtn, Ps a —. a stn - ST 9 ron OPeTs days weekly. MU 5-9133 Inspectors, pres mech & instrum 9..Open|Artist, package design, high salary. Amalfi, days. R. L. Polk, 354 4th, 12th fl ture. Detecto Scales, 1 Main St. Bx 
Girls, no exp, light factory work; $24.70)/ment; give details. K93 Time: attr, gd sal_ Al Employnt (Agy), 1 W 34th.|= sramercy Siorage. 5? _*- ; Candy and pastry salesiadies. Louis Sherry,|/!@ter foreman, inspectg.etc.exp only$1.50 hr/personnel_ 15 E 40th Boys wanted; good eppty. Simon Cohen,|Draftsmen, sr, expr im aircraft parts @ 
for 48 hr Art Crayon, 5601 Ist Av, Bklyn|Key punch opers, 5 nights; I B M, alpha-|Secretary, good at figures; permanent; a —, salary $23. Empire 300 Park AV Pharmacist & non-retail, inexp too. .Open|, ii agency, lettering, layout, compre- p12 7 Av, 10th fl oo == Cs mech elect units. Union Aircra M24 
Girls (8 & over), learners, war plant; $26,|betic; perm. Rm 1202, 370 Lexington (4lst).|salary $35; state age, exp. K215 Times. | 300k Rm 517, 9 ei iz |\Candy salestadles, $35; “YE EO * Snemaiats 2 D>. M 38 Ss * = ae hensives. Write in detail: $75. Mi46 Times |Boy wanted to learn woolen business under|Dftsman, marine, hull, machy. elect! exp¢ 
48 hrs. U flee Mfg Co, 222 W 14th. | Kitchen hel rm; good ; Hotels| Secy- jonist, dental office; references|/¥P!Sts, gem office workers, factory office,|—®! : . fe) jBacteriologis ystologis pen}; selon — - -———|pleas conditions; $28. Surtex, 249 W 39th.|H. Newton Whittelsey. Inc. 17 Bat: 
> . | - > a pay; tels| Secy-receptionist, den ¢ 3 8 Bay Ridge st-war oppty. X2652 Times |Terminal Candies, 30 Church St (arcade) -!cocmetic prod mgrs&others, NY daway.Open|Artist, comm’l, exp layouts, etc. Federal) ——— = : — — . : 
Girls 30, ctory ;| Brittany, Blackstone, others. 234 7 Av.|required. X2589 Times aieanapeiain Tied ee ior bed. es: 35 — pest- Clerks, part time, hours conveniently ar-|Stock mgr & other shipg. etc... .$30-$40+|Tel & Rad, 39 Central Av. E Newark, N J.|Boys, $28.60, light factory work, increases | architectural, industrial plas. 
days oper Sc t E 6 St Lathe operator, bench mach; steady wk;|Secretary, 5 days, permanent; good salary. war oppty. Room 1408, 320 Bway. ranged, 55c hr. 370 7 Av_ (1630) _|Trainees, labs, sales & others $30-$50| Assemblers, exp precision work, mach shop|(“ety_60 days. Camburn, 490 Broome. loor layouts. X2751 7 


a : -|some exp. Daworth, 100 6 A nt’l Mutosco 44-01 11 St. LIC : = eS ._. Soe — . — -|— . : 7 — : . 285 Boys, men, for errands, mornings, 9-12.|Drillpress opers; stead 0 | avere 
Giri, Bandy on costume jewelry repair é a 5 AY Int'l Mutoscope 01 : 4+_<:__lfynist, knowledge figures; general office|Dental detail representative, traveling; ELLIS SERVICE background; mechtronics. ME 5-2854.__|po%1 Gtrice Supply, 22 ‘Duane se eet oltienin onks aa a ee i 


y. Room & 1 A |Lathe, drill press opers, expd, post-war, Sec . f{fice: | « aT° lary nse X2761 Times 2 i ss ists — : 

os ae . 4 ~» © b y. personnel; resident buying office;|work, monitor board, $30. DB672 Times. /|S4lary, expenses. X2 ./500 8 Av (42d) 355 E 149th (Bronx)/Assemblers on radio chassis, machinists. 

Girls, usherette staff! — pay Room ste ady. Ippolito, 401 Cone rd cS. Bronx l5-day. 40-hour week Klis Times. Typist-clerk aia aaeneei "5 densi Dress saleswomen. exp, high-gr dressmakg. ACCTNT office mer. oil ex. to $4,500|Times Telephoto Equip Inc, 229 W 43 St Bove, | + a or 1 to 6, library page ree pomen . Apply Standard 
403, Capitol Theatre, 1639 Bwa earners on corsets rassieres; oppty.| 2-9682 4 “ > loor. "}Phone, write Harry Collins, 647 5 Av ACCTNTS, mfg, public, com to $5,000) 45 7 7 j > exe = - aunery, 9ot Garfield erse : 

M jSecretary. RE 2-96 $25. 149 Madison Av, 10th floor = Ls . Asst manager, New York hotel; excellent Boy-man, full or part time; oppty learn|Electrical A electronic engineer. researen 


Girls! Light work, experience unnecessary ;|Merzon 666 5 AV Section mgr, coat dept; gd sal, fine oppty.|Typist, clerk. perm pos; reliable drug firm;|Exee type, ed suc, full-part time; lib PAYROLL acctg ciks, exp -+++++*$46lopportunity for advancement. X2629 Times multigraph. Mojud Hos, 36-20 33 St, LIC.|devel lab: post-war or E1382 mes 
0 Boys, pt time, ship, pee gds dept; gd pay | Editorial assistant, headline writer, home- 


s 





et , 





$23.1 a hour m 11 W 23d.jLegal stenographer, experienced, single) coawi 523 Ful ~ l -- A -4 > nm i 2 W 45, 7 fl. Marshall} TRAINEES, keypunch, IBM ooo San : 
: P _~ g’¢/Goodwins, 523 Fulton St, Bklyn __—.|5ig-day week; $25 start. WA _9-2120 um; pd training #. - BEKPR, typist. real estate exp.....$40 1 po SE, ag ‘waa — 


Girls-women “stock work, clerical; perm./Practitnr; 5% days: $35; oppty. LA 4-4562 | Shop ~ gee _- ——'_* ——— - - —z Giris- 18-35. as soda dispensers b, 7 J 
~ ae = - ' pers, exp unnecessary, perm; some . : sirls-women, a 3 pe . * 7 . Ma a . 2 a = ao ~ - ee A ~ ~A - 
Lane Bryant. 15 Hanover F Bklyn. _ Librarian, ass't, in medical libraky, eXPitravel: advancement. 250 W 57th (6th fil)./, . nS Fe a ee or time salesgirls Loft Candy, 251 W 42d, 3d fl cae pak ned pny aa. oo = Asst payroll clerk & relief nite a | peers Si UnecrEsrment 12) Madison meri io mnt — — > - 
eces. Rockefeller Ins 6 St-York Av —%. ~ See ee m3 = — : a 36 |e. var ” : x . | ‘ reader, «xp unne 
Girls, young attractive; cigarettes, night) - Rockefeller _Inst.. 66 St-York AV./Shorthand, typist, for Jewish organization, |Typisi-clerk, receptionist; good oppty. See|Miilinery saleslady-model, attractive; fine) NIGHT blueprint trainees, no exp nec $36|529. See Mrs. Schwartz, 12 E 86th. _ stmpngs ae pay. US Klee Mf —Ww or yw? » 4 _** — 
clubs. Manhattan Cente 11_W_ 34th, 4-6.|Maids,bathmaids. Apply timekeeper, Hotel|/Bklyn; good conditions: perm, X2609 Times.jwjiss Rose, Hotel Edison, 226 W 47th millinery; sal. Mme. Pauline, 6 E 534 STOCK & shippg. Manh, Bklyn,Bx to$40|Asst packs, shipg clk; driver's lic; 5-day/ i food dishreom, pert —s ‘twashers |Electrical inspect ° : 
Girls-women, 18-36, as soda dispensers,|' y, 49 St and’ Lexington Av \Soda girls, waitresses; full-part time; no|yypist, some steno, general office asst,|Publisher needs women; educ sales serv;| BOYS, opptys, fine futures _.$25-$30|wk. Garfield Medica! Apparatus, 147 W_ 22./—" uffer y ia ses Lantneten “Ae cabent lLewyt os — ry Le eqaipmnant. 
Saiietieta Cate Comat 1 W 42d, 34 floor.|Mail girls, 5-da; $85 mo; adv; perm; pub-|experience. Whelan Drug, 165 W_ 46th mfg concern. Weber-Lott. 64 W 36th 5-50 yrs; com, bon. 10-2, 551 5 Av (1019) KAHN AGENCY, INC. Assistant manager. 68th St Playhouse, 1164) 5 oy bus cirta: ; ~ it = [Micctvician. cae tie See - 
Girls. 17-46: vital work: $35-§45 & more he Mi Veber, F. W. Dodge, 119 W 40. |Soda girls, expd pref; no Suns, holidays; Typists, $100 month; good oppty; pleasant|>4!cs person, experienced flat ware, 5 days, 100-108 W 42 ST 3_Av._Apply _bet_12 & 3 FM | asuerianm Tet & Tel co, 32 AY tG ai) lrepairs: drive A  Peener ee See 
ion . Wat 62-10 iside Av. Queens.|Manager, new yard goods store, mid-Manh;|good pay. S. Klein, 6 Union Sq ; surroundings. 112 W 38th, 14th floor no nights, 5th Av shop. DH676 Times ACCOL NTANTS Assistant buyer, commercial stationery, Bi ‘ch , 5 ana | ess “ 4 1 I 
Girls, for griddle; $30 start; also dish-|©xce! oppy, gd pay. Box 761, 1474 Bway. |Siatistical typist, rapid and accurate; good) Pypist, expd clerical. work; 40-hr wk;|5#lescirl, hosiery, handbags, jewelry; exc s BOOKKEEPERS good at figures. S. H. Moss, 36 E 23d yo no a, steady or weekends. oa Stage lighting, em- 
washer. Rike Food Shops 9 W SOt |Manicurist, expert only. James, 538 5 Av. |salary \% days. WH 4-8137 os $120 per mon; steady position. CH 4.8100 /position _good sal. Frank Bros, 588 5 Av. OE Cae Attendants, ride hospital ambulances; full . ‘ok 1 : acy bigh wa be “Lae ceivicins — t ; laza 201 ; 
Girls, colored-white, counter work; no exp; | Masseuse, lic, Florida salon; exceptional|Stenographers-typists, beginners; opportu-| Typist, mail order exp pref; 5 days, $30.|5#lesgiris, full-part time; sal & comm, OFFICE CLERKS time; perm. X2738 Times oii Market” 878 E 241st ‘wages, bones. ae SS eS ee See. Sep 
$22 start. Chock Full O’ Nuts, 250 W 54th pty; gd pay: write details. X2316 Times.|nity; permanent. WA _5-0300, Ext 22. _ | Room 502, 501 5 AV |Xmas bonus. Lerner Shops, 412 5 Av. NY. BOYS ‘ Attorney (N J). part time, legal work, re-| 5 ah slorer geod > Jer-|Blectrician’s helpers; $36 wk: hotel ax 
Girls wanted, novelties; white or colored; |Masseuse, lic, exp, salon; good salary; hrs|Stenographer, clerical, exp, cosmetic ©0,|Typisi, general office, 384 hours, $25;|Salesgiris, expd hosiery, lingerie; downtown MANY DESIRABLE POSITIONS lating to Real Prop matters. X2708 Times sey City an rr 12 A we = F°7; Sco \ptd poe inl pers; . - wa; Betel ap 
steady work. 142 W 24th, llth Floor. 6-10 P M. Richard Hudnut. 693 5 Av. [$120 month, perm 2d fl, 67 Vestry St perm; postwar. Globe Ticket. 154 W 14th |shop D. E. Levy, office, 6 Maiden Lane ____ OUTSTANDING FIRMS Attorney (patent), chemical _ application oe a ge ~ “ ; i c =. x Wkectrickam — = aes : auneds 
Girls, light assembling work; 55¢ hr.|Masseuses, lic, fuli-part time; good pay;|Stenographer, 5 days; opportunity, natl/Typisi, some knowledge steno; insurance|Salesgiris, expd women’s access; full-part EDWARDS AGENCIES | ¢*P_¥&r_work. Mr. Watson. UN 4-6000 taurant. 260 W — avaanges eel ration: ér = ~ 3 is es . ao 
Apeda, 212 W 48 St jgym; city, out-of-town. K74 Times. __jorganization. Adam Hats, 665 Bway, NYC.Joffice; $100 mo. Miss Callaway, BE 3-4412./time; sa! plus com. Roaman’s, 20 W 39th 20 CORTLANDT ST Automatic B & 8 set-up men & machinist. | cod : ad i [Electriclans and helpers. trial. ¢ : 
Matron or nurse, speak Jewish; gd sal, ex|Stenographer, exp, $30, 5-day week. Phone| Typist, some clerical, begnr considered; 5/Salesgiris, candy, no exp! $28 up; steady. Master Mech (Shop) $100. Design M.E.$125|;American Improved, 139 Spring St, NYC.)@utchers (©). £ pay; steady position ans and helpers 5 al G & %. 


Girls, office, full, part time; students con-| h 80 Deltalb | St E $60. arch Struct $60 - - —-1661 9th Av. N ¥ Electric ¢ : 
day: 50c hr 5 Av, 6tl age 1ome. Levindale alto, Md./Lé 9100, E a os ns: $: 7-27 Apply 10 on’s, 218 W 34th, 80 alb.|/ Stress Engr f rch. or Struct. 3 5. 53 . = —— — 
] d home. Levindale, Balto. Md A 4 ) Ext 34 fays; no Saturdays; $20 GR 88 Apply 10-4. Barton's, 21 1 £ « Auto mechanics, expd trucks; $61.86 = Buyer, versaille; geod opportunity. ~Call|Electronle engineer, familiar CHF & radio 


Girls, gen office wk; exp unnec; pleasant|/Medical steno, exp record room; pleasant|Stenographer; $30; competent, ; beginner; | Typist, “pddressing *agrelopes; “part time|Salesgirl, costume Jewelry, expd; sal $30 wf $50 one Bek . we = hrs. Lurie Auto, 162 Christopher St, N PL. 8.3000 werk. Lewet Gee o 1 - - 
< t { Ed 14 W 46t iding Doctors Hospital, 540 E &8th.|permanent; 5% days. 27 William St (1402)./ evenings WH 4-1344 plus comm. Sarazin, 19 W 42d : >. Mesign Too “i Auto mechanic, Chrysler exp pref, 44 hrs,/-. . - 
Route Sales $45. Cost Clerk $45lexcellent cond. 459 11 Av (37th) Cabinetmakers, for display fixtures. Harry|Elevator opt midnight-8 AM: § 


Girl, colored-white, fur factory; $25 start;|Medical assistant, stenographer, reception-|Stenographer, expd, bright yng girl; 40-hr|Pypist, some experiénce; 5 days, 40 hours.|Salesgiris, expd candy gift shop: oppty.| coins (cutie - . — ; 
. < Sern ‘ ‘ ; a. , — i . . righ ° ° ; wr ~ » a s J ry) $35. Inventory Clerk. .$36 " Coopersmith, Inc, 620 W 44th me if desired jotel Cardina 
ext f na A 2-8111 jwk; gd sal. Apply Mr. Wilson, AL 4-5049.|/post-war! LO 5-5231 Rose Marie De Paris. Inc, 664 5 Av (524).) Clerks, Guards, Mess, Stock, Shipg. .$28-35 — ath, 38 W esa Mrinitey "CO 5.0008. Candy (hard) makers & helpers; good pay|=0¢ A’ 

Girls, for inspection and second operation:| Messengers, girls, housewives, over 18:|Steno, intell beginner; oppty, export con-|Typisis, homeworkers, addressing; excellent|Salesgiris, exp lingerie store; sal $30 plus ALL-AMERICAN SERVICE. * WUD eh aabacar a ., in vey % h & condns. La Marquise, 553 W "s4th |Elewater operat 
‘ wr hour eed M ¢, AT 9-8563 ifull-part time RCA Comm. 66 Broad St |ct day, $25. LA 4-3794 (morn rate United Mailing Co, 117 E 29tt jcomm. Sarazin, 431 5 Av ACCTS. intern - ro uto sander polisher, perm; ra, . - = + = 
tt ni 6 | | al, travel exp & £1360)". o Carpet, lineleum layers; high wages; at good wages. Realty Ad 
Girls, Women, as cooks; other positions; Messengers, light deliveries: $20 weekly,|Stenos, Juniors, oppty; 5 da, 35 hes. Apply| Typist: 5 days, $25; advance. North Amer|Salesgirl, neat, intelligent, better type iC MAN, mati rm exp. supe wh si50]° time J & B Autos. 36 W 43d Budd — = A, £ iia atdy | ee ear? Sa, 
‘. 1 m F 0) Tr Grant, 575 7 Av.iWarel 1133 Tiffany St Bronx ibaker good pa no Suns. 55 W_ 56 St.| ACCOUNTANTS. intrni. mot picts, 5-d.$45 Auto mechanic, A-1, tune-up, breaks, wheel , . 


werk S-(iay week.|Messencers, bright, 825 week; light work.|Steno, perm, expd, accurate; mig concern.) Typist, general office work; 5-day wk; gdjSalesgirl, friendly, exp unnee; photo sta-/CLERK, heavy exp, gd at figs $175) alignment; $1.50 hr. comm, 9-5, GL 5-2868 —— 2 A ey ore 1 fine — vellel man 
' Ar lith floor, 123 W 64 St salary; oppty. 156 E 42d, 6th fl id work, Saks, 4 St Photo Studk 'd 11. [COST CLERK, uptn. some exp av $98-$40/Bar cashier, over 45; some exp Hotel "= 2 i lApoly , ‘ 
TATIONERY stk clk, Sd, Rad City. $125)Astor_ Employment, 219 W_ 44th Carpenter, $100 per month, room & beard.|~! : 
Waish, Cliffside 6-2281, N J | Blew ator operater, apartment 








sd: : 4 ’ 1% 








‘8. no exp 


exe 12" 44t} 1 flight 19.1 1] ’ keepe 44 . Ve 


Girls, light taete 
vid Seid y ! 
Girl, 1 cto ork , at dbc|Milliners, high-class retall shop. Hollborn,|Steno-typ, personable; oppty; varied de-|Typist-clerk; nice job if good caleulator;|Salesgirl, exp handbags, costume jewelry;|)* 1 
_ a , , réieemeumns |” nap, $35, 5% day. K1i44 Times |wholesaler. 171 West, Bklyn 4 salary. 562 Madison Av. PL 9-6834 oe LKS, mny, Rad City, ete $110-$120)/Rar apprentices, young, neat; meals, unif Wo 
. ry : i MOT PICT CLES, 5-day, yng 25 Stouffer Emp Dept, 346 Lexington Av Carpenters, exp; good steady work Cal Zs 

—- < - - ‘ & . ‘ pty, }Salesgicls, full-part time; sal & comm, f r g ’ 

Giri, filing erie good oppy inexp auNaer, full or part _ time good pay.|Stenographer, experienced, alert, good|Typist-steno, assist manager's secty, ac xe rry A k jot ‘aa, Fulton, Bkiyn BAYLES. 140 W 42D. NR BWAY gy eo eC: incl aftrnnen Guile teen aie T As Rlevaice oper ane PP 


Raybond eatres. 1 Bway m 1514 156 24 Av, N ¥ | Cardwell, 81 Prospect St, Bklyn jcurate, expd: $32. Hotel Drake, 440 Park INTERVIEWS 9 AM TO 2PM Bell Cane C) os coum, oo i Gi bt lCarpentert, reush a? ik! 
- —— — $29.90, 48 } ;|Millinery assistant, exp or fur hats. M IStemnegrapher (1), assistant bookkeeper| Typist-steno, perm: gd pay leasant con-|Salesgirls, full-part time; sal & comm, rCHIN . . a - = oe — sm B. ; my ~ — — : : . 
Girls, in xP. tablew we a 4 hours > _ i a Be} “i soi Week an ae the ag ee ean Ss 4 a Xmas bonus. Lerner Shops, 27 W 42, NY ae Al crue te — Beliboy relief. Hotel Seymour, 50 W 45 bm ‘ Long Island City 5 opers & porters: 44 he 
> Lat 4 Sem : o $5 2 i ‘ 
work: 40 hred|Millinery copyists, expd only Salinger, | Steno, gen office wk, expd, know! Spanish| Typist, monitor board; good salary; Bronx|Salesgirt, ony, Genser) "4 paleey; IND ARTIST in packaging. .$4000-$5000 sl ~~ Kg y' el os Saochat’ Diner nae Camel eee — Elevator oper (nights), residence 
j f 1538 Madison A st jesirable; perm. R1042 Times Downtown.| resident preferred. MO 9-1294 vermanent e Sp own, 15 Fifth 4 SHIP-Charge etc. perfumes 940-50 [oe tear SP qeee Sy yn on : lsalary. 404 W : 
Girls, women, as packers & wrappers; £d|Millinery copyist, at designer; $40 start; |Stenographer asst, in office, no experience) Typist, knowledge stenography, olfice|Salesgiris, handbags, hosiery, gloves; sal-| SHIPPING CLERKS $30.45 |Slacksmith’s helper. Chelsea Elevator Co, yi SS a ee a ——— 
ny, steady Gottfried Baking bs iit da opp Knox, 417 5 Av ecessary; good pay: 9-5. K160 Times |work, permanent. TRafalgar 4-578! sry-comm. A. S. Beck, 2 W_ 43d, 6th 1.) EX.SERVICE MEN—See Mr Simpson [551 W_ 52 St Cashler = with Hrandt aa ra — hine, | Duliding ' : hon We ‘ew 
day! Light|Millinery designer for better hats; exeel-|Steno; perm; Si4-d wk; salary & bonus/Pypist, oppty learn dictaphone; 5-d; §20/Salesiadies, glove dept, expd Apply Per FORMER ARMY OFFICER Bookkeeper, asst, typist, young, $140 no Sundays 434 St Cafeter 10 w ro Slevaic : ich . 
f i jient opportunity, 1605 Times approx $35 weekly. R1043 Times Downtown |plus bonus start. 11 E 35th, 4th ff nel Off, 24 fl bale, Saks, Mth-Bway EMPLOYMENT ASSOC, INC, month Apply 24 fl, 260 Weat St \ashi 2 éb . <™ | Sus ee oe ecm Ue Aout 
1 . , “ o » pe. nat ’ e 
Girts, T2855 026, 48 hee, tieht factory wk,| Millinery, copyist, expd; good salary; at|Stenographer-biller, monitor board experi vist, circulation exp pref, 5 day, 35-hriSaleslady, expd dresses; good salary — ) MAIDEN LANE Bookkeeper, accountant, mfg exp, good 4 ~ ” Collin i Ez “wy ay | Blewai P 
a Gh ween ¢ ie , | ones Montclair 2-639 lence: salary open. ST 9-0456 wk. Radio Weekly, 99 Hudson St Shirley Dress Shop, 50 W_ 8th UNDERWRITER, Comp & G L, some foppty in Texas. K6 Times t —— + I) oo ay percere 
- | 7 o - : s . badles’ ats, steady; excel sal.| production. Dallas " Open|Rookkeeper (asst), thoroughly expd; knowl| ©*8¢maker, leather boxes; perm; good pay,|H0'e! chain. top pa —- 
Girts ago ‘ / . Ganstartam: bas nae aw ay jag AL a ey 3 hours; aneeragney, Ste Br arate Gm Figures; to ae rag perm, _ gece th oe | Livingston St Bkiyn or Nev. |SPECIAL Agent, Cas, Ohio terr, exp.Open typing 4 ba CA 6 5357 7 cane overtime 419 4 Av Tth floor) jElevator oper, aise porter 
oot ela Appiy ¢ 4 ' CRG. SOrtty Weresssee p oes cenen ale roo ) congen y : ° ‘ = UNDERW, HO Comp&@GL, exp, Bos.$4,000 - > jayt Chaser, ornamental bronse casting, ex nea ‘Ss 4 . ated 
Giirts no oexp, 17-21, mall elk learn|Models, attractive, with selling ability.|Stenographer, 5-day week; $27 per week.| Typist, bener, insurance broker's office; Satestedy, “eve egy — — ah, SAFETY Engr, hvy comp oan ed. $3,600 Boexkesper, sel (a a ay $35 start General Bre nze Corp 4 19 10 St +a | Elevator eperaters permanent, good 
switchbdd, 5-dy, $20 start. Evans 0 E 43./Apply 12 noon, Lilly Dache, 78 E Séth.|/Lummus Co, 420 Lexington Av, Rm 1231.|permanent; $25. R1038 Times Downtown. /$50. Apply Rm 110 53 Bway, cor 14th.icoup claim Examiner. H O ex $3.600 A. J. Miller, 884 Columbus Av o : WIADDlyY manas ay "a - 
TL Tit, sa ; Salestady, hosiery; no evenings; good pay. —— : P| Bookk r, real estate met office exp.|Chsuffeur, for light delivery truck. Call) Apply manager, Pickwick A . 
Girls-women, office work; mo exp; full-/Model, bust 35”, waist 76%", hips 37”,|Stenographer-typist, gen office asst; exp|Typist, high school graduate; perm pos; |"*!esady, vi ° KATHARINE B. WHITE ecusceper, Fe o Bs e onD- NE 8-5480 i fri ; 
part time 0 7 Av, 12th f |5’7", no exp. Mr. Silver, 354 4 Av (7 fl)./unnec: $25 start. 101 Maiden Lane, Rm 507.|single preferred. Rm 302, 100 E 42 St./Rosain, 558 7 Av (40th). LO 5-9017 55 W 42D, ROOM 721 oan 12ie,_ 208 Post Av. CA &See. Chauffeur, all around man, to help in| Diets Ice ¢ S. 61-207) av 
a - . 2 D . x » v1 . , 20 TL A 
Girls, no exp req, $26, 48 hrs, light faec-|Models, size 14, tall; excellent pay; high-|Stenog, begnr; sal plus bonuses; perm; 5'4|Typist, perm, Boy Scout office, midtown jeakesinds, enps Grosses, costy eeees = SALESMEN, Woolworth, Kresge exp, es — eee aes tips. Hotel store. Call noon, 728 8 iy. : ° Engineers, elec-mech-ind 
tory work Rappaport 16 W 34 St ; dresses. Coronet, 530 7 Av jays. Hart-Smith & Co, 52 William St.|WI 7-4251, Miss Carlsen > ane ©. 4 ®. (02 i inside advtg rep $100 + abassacor. Fark AV-o) Seo = = = Electric rep, USES yr 
: a -- | ~ ; - - : oe Salesiadies, expd, children’s wear chain;| CLKS. typs. fam expor oc Boys, 4-F, knowl mech drawing; $36.40|Chauffeurs, $49.96; helpers, $41.22, 44-hr)Electric rep, USES : 
Girls, light factory work; 50 d wages Models, adv photography. Send description,|Steno, learn Ediphone; excl oppy beginner; |Typist-dictaphone operator; 5-day week 87th & 3 AV Sure ‘ak’ Rh. --, hae 5 +4 st "a hrs, 5d Dept A, Accurate, 22 W. 21./WK. Rallway Express Agency, 219 E 42d Engineer 3. S res hotel 
} 4 ermit r Gle | , 2 


, ver aol > - . pe J “ - . . OK Y. > iberg Bros 
Clasp Envelope ¢ 27 Biee return: fee basis. K164 Times.|5 days. $25. Erstein. 1071 6 Av (41st) post-war. Ruberoid Co, 500 5 Avy good pay. Greer f - 
. "Y cee y As Salesiadies, expd; fine ready to wear;| PHOTO. exp journalistic ptg....to $60 /Boys, light factory work; 48 hrs; $26.65. Chauffeurs, garage; day work; a . 


Girls, young women, war work: exp UB-\Model. size 11, knowledge | steno-ivping: |Sienographer, Eéiphone exp; 5-4 wh. ad-|Tyolets-stence. od sal, 5 dave. Vera loppty: permanent. Wilma. 4 W_ S7th CORWIN. 2 E UD Heywood, 263 9-Av (26th) Consolidated Auto Storage, 108 W S4th___|Engineer. mechanical desien work 
‘ ba T) ste ¥ : . : aul ‘ ? ; | ; 236 ir : - res oe tao . - a . " : motive exp pref ed . a 

5- $26 29-$35 Mc { 2 ; ) ; | i tive office. Prince George |5alesiadies, retail fabrics; full, part time;;|ADVTSG mgr, cosmetics benus-+0s.008 Boy, packing; 5-day; $2240 plus ovt; no auffeurs, parce eliveries; no nights Pf | { 
—— = ao Sense fF ; Spey after ¢| Model, — bm) —, = Soe good salary ry og pay, advancement. Typist iat onesuasve - ce Mrcoree) ood salaries. The Yardstick, 11 W 42d WRITER, pub rel aviation .--$5,000lexp nec. Waterman's Pens, 344 Hudson St Goldemith, Tr Neseau St NY _ purr a4 and helpers. induszrial 

- a ht a ———e., i | —— . —— ” : -|Admin hd purchase window displays..$3,900 1 post. ceniicheckers, fe and verage; expd. Cafe/S. Electric Co, 220 Throop A s 

ge - - : > = $35! Moe olan - -s ‘ : Salesiadies, credit clothing; sal-com; per uM Boy publg office, mail parcel post, zenl 

Girls light factory we rk a exp nec; Mod. 1, size 11, attractive, coats & suits Bee noquepuss. Stee som on s 5 _— oy | 4 a conetesess good eases Habiamaenn Gan tn An BKKPR, acctnt, un 38, chain store...$3,000| work: 5 days, $25. 101 W Bist. Rm 1610,)24mzibar, 1619 Bway, 4°30-6 P M. |Engineers, electrical & electronics. & 

; — 2 a aad , ” sae ae ey or 7. ; j » - ; |Salesladies experienced ready-to-wear. ACCTNG clerk, advtsg. 5 day.. $2,600) Roy, errands, make self generally useful.|~"eckers, food or liquor, day or night./Times Donwtown 
Girls, office work, 5 days, $20; advance-| Models, jr 7”, bust 34”, waist 24”,|Stenographer, commercial or real estate| Typist, statistical, bgnrs; $22; give details; - , A -,» 3. ASST purchasing agent, radio $2,600) Ant , 97 @ Mr. Rosenberg. TR 5-7811 lEngi r w : 
ment, pleasant condit! K120 Time hips 34”. Jaunty Jr, 500 7 Av exp: $30: 5-day week. 170 Bway, Room 909,.|perm. P1082 Times Downtown De Pinna, 6th floor, 2 W_ 52d EDWARDS. 73 WARREN ST Sanders Printing, 40 W 17 St. 0 Check 4 hi a TE slerae ag gm Apply Western Eler- 

£ 2 : . - - - - — . ’ 4 Ss. 7 [N ST. : eckers and cashiers ood y! xp: =) 3 Hudson § NY 

Girl light, clean factory work; start 60c, Models, Jr size 13. Oppenheimer-Franken,|Sten-secy, recent coll grad, med vocabu'ry|Typist, some steno, no exp neces; 5-day Salesladies, part time for ladies specialty Blueprint Mche Opr .2% of profits+$45 Boys, 40 ars wk, factory work; $23 start. Diamond Jim's, 1481 Broadway wiad 4 i Engl t ch je frigerati . 
overtime 90c. Staff Co, 151 W 18 St |Inc, 500 7 Av desirable. Rockefeller Inst, 66St.-York Av.|Siegel, 99 Madison Av shop: sal-com. Emily Shops, 2 W 37th. |pponn FOREMAN $75 4/147 W 35 St, 12th fl. : ae ee Fyth-al f mlnew Jersey, Wood Ss wa 
Girls, expd, work similar costume jewelry;|Model, size 12, 5’ 8”, dresses; $50; expd,|Stenographer, excellent opportunity for|Typists, beginners. Good pay! Bonus!|Salesiady, women's specialty exp, $30-$40) INcpECTORS, Ist & 2d cl........$65-$105|Boy, commercial photographic studio, asst erm. = on Elizahethe 9.2348 » Riegel |e j , = - 

days, 40 hrs; $25. Servue, 2 E 46th latt Models Sve Agcy, 1457 Bway (424) |promotion; not duration job. 0285 Times. |Permanent. Busch's, 43 Cortlandt St plus comm. Champs Elysees, t, : 424. |ASST PURCHASING AGENT $50-$75 errands, $25. TO Madison AY a ~\Ghemiat PH_D- or expd develnan't oaseve Quick Barviee I pee cn ee 
Girls, ne ! Hilgh-paying trade! Facty./Nit kers, 5-12 mid, » midtn; 6-|Steno, P , ; 54) Typist-receptionist, ex Parkville Lum-|5aleslady, retail dress shop; sa comm./EXPEDITER, purch dept $180-+-mo.|Boys, exp unnec, steady, good pay, rs, ~ By . A. Me : 
~- 1s N de Blv " ” I 7 % St). 6 fi os $33 ae eee 2 wr ad jaars: aS ee ee ee ” ty 1146 hedford Fang MA 2-8228.|Cooperman’s, 637 Madison Av, 3d floor BOYS-MEN, no exp overtime 80c-$1 hrmjovertime. Johnson, 78 Walker S ment toilet articles 4& cosmtcs. AT23 Times|Engineer, E.E. or Physics, prod dev, resre® 


Girls-women, plier work, jewelry, no exp;|Nurse, RN, for industrial, 28-38 years.|Stenographer, mature, insurance office;|Typist, knowledge stenography, _office|Salesiady, expd, in commercial stationery;| GENERAL PLACEMENT BUREAU Boys, for inside work. The Imperial Biue- Chemist, control, analysis soaps, fats, oils; | 4 test. Post-wa: e 





Girls, mig coametics, light 
ove 1 wv ”" j 


« ‘ 





Girls-women, post-war jobs 
f “ $22 at ' t ¢ ms Ke 43) I 


" 











opt 6th 
Pr u 





Giri 


eu 


Girls, no exp nec; easy, clean work han-|Nurses, chge fl duty; delivery rm, nursery;|Steno, accurate, expd financial statements;|Typists, $100 month, good 
4 tions i Rid ) th.jd ight. Adelphi ) Greene Av. Bklyn days: $35; perm. R1065 Times Downtown.|also part timers. 112 W_ 38th, 14th 


5-day. Polumbaum. 630 5 Av (Radio City).|NG16%8 Times steady, good salary. TR 5-1062, 9-12 A M.|work; permanent. TRafalgar 4-5781 $28 start. Nor-wood, 289 4 Av (23d) 132 NASSAU ST EST 1922/Print_Co, 153 E 42 St Cat Ane eae Box ‘ rena a" [Enginecers, designers, draftemen for print« 
D ) mA P : 2 } 4 a h . A > — - “16 ‘ de nited|ing presses: specify ex a <152 Times. 
Gicls. 4 eols ascii; = dene: it . ea | gS > -|Fypists, beginners. Gd ! Bonus! Also|Saleswomen, exp. Apply Personnel, 10-1.;COMPTROLLER recent public accountin Koys for mail room; full time or morn-|( ier clerks, no experience nee 
bonus; excel cond. Renwal, 17 E 224 [ME 5-7496- =p ew PM ‘MO 9 ty $40. ey Bg ® W a0 at cow part "time. Busch's, 35 W lith, 253 W 34th [Jay Thorpe, 25 W_56 St : exp. also prev mach shop exp... .$6,000/ings. Home Life Ins, 256 Bway. __| Cigar. 165 W 46th (Room 311). __ | Engineer with ice permit. Waldor!-Asteria 
Girl, for stock and shipping; good salary:|Nurse-medical asst, child specialist's office; |Steno-typist, genl off wk; neat efficy $130|Typists, clerks; steady; overtime; excelleni|Salesladies, expd, steady, good salary; COMPTR, Asst—mach shop exp. .. $6,000) Bay, i7, shooting gallery; exp unneces-| Clerical assistant, statistical exp. Carlin, | Emp\ yiment e. St and Lexingte: 
ppty: steady work. 156 E 42d floor.|5%4 days. P O Box 304, Jackson Helghts.|mo. Rubico, 34 Hubert St, City. WA 5-5970.|conditions. Gibbs & Cox, 21 West St ladies’ & children’s wear. EV 4-9167 Re i BE pary; $90 weekly. 1063 Bway. ___ |x" reece ©h,_ oe ee ee ee ee ee 
mail room; good opportunity to learn|Nurses, delivery rooms; days & nights;|Stenographer, some legal exp; perm pos;|Typists & Clerks, 51-day. Bendix Aviation,|Saleswomen for cloth coat dept. By 1. J. A 1 s. yy F Coser ae Boy, errands, learn dental mechs. Achiron peanrens ae a city employe wanted|ments; mfg. No N J area. N ‘ 
atte wameintens Call LE 2-282 ed sal’ 753 Bushwickaw, Bkign. FO 9-0000.lcongenial cond 286 "Mdadinnn “an (dass [166 Nostrand Av, Bkiyn Fox. 1 E 36th. Ask for Mr. Kamborian van. he Be Ae oe — ig Dental Lab, 902 Park Av, Brooklyn. _—[623_ Times, 217 7 Av. fe IO | Engineer, air condit, heatg, knowl desig 
Girl, capable rhinestone pester, sterling) Nurses, grads; all shifts; excellent pay;|Steno, real opp; limited exp considered; | Typist, young, experienced. “Municipal Saleswomen, toys, games, hobbies; 3, 4, 5 . ”. cae ch te" 42D. . Boys, shipping room, light work; high pay, wf Ea A keeping; ; 5jes mating t . <7 - 
. X 2%691 Time hosp in Bklyn. Nurs’g office, WI 6-9700. |perm pos: old est concern, R.S., MU 2-3880|Bond House, Room 2800, 39 Bway da wk. Apply 166 W 35th, Macy's a EX. 2 _ = es overtime. 450 W_ 3ist, 4th floor days. Cal Room 2601, 450 7 Av. N ¥ ¢ jEngineer, licensed; post-war Cail Chief 
, opportunity: |Saleswomen, retail ladies’ wear, furs; sales| ,,, WORN. AGENCY, 505 STH Me ® a=|Boy, for retail luggage store; good oppty.|Clerical, adding mach exp; $40.24 semi-|Engineer. NE &-7100 d 
floor |€XP; $40, comm, Room 1407, 475 5 Av rtp ee as _ae 9 weve >) Savoy, 60 E 59th monthly. 959 8 Av. 3d floor |Engineer, hospital Ridgewood, sieady 
: 5) N 0 e . ~ 0 . ° lait “el! i” 2 4 a a 
Saleswomen, exp unnecessary, busy depts.|RANK TELLERS. exp $2,000| Boys! No exp, bright (16 & over), assem- Clerk, liquor store; Manhattan; state age, sition. Call HE 4 ‘ 
72. WY a : bly: $31.20, 48 hrs. Freed. 72 Spring St.|/¢xPerience salary. K213 Times |Engineer, also asst, N ¥ lic, exp operation, 


Girl, general office work ood at figuring; |Nurses, graduates, undergraduates, nursery|Steno-typist, insurance claims exp pref,|Typist, some exp, ywl steno not nec; 3s 
no ex H. Singer, 113 King 1 Av. Bklyn.|& maternity Mi Russell, RE 9-1406.|not essential; sal open. R1064 Times Dntn./9-5, 5 days. Gimpel_ 74 Front St, N ¥ C./Personnel, Lane Bryant, 1 W_ 39th ABBYE AGENCY : : = ary ne 
Girls-women, messengers over 18, light|Nurses, floor duty, days, night; good sal-|Stenographer, excel oppy, advancement as-| Typist-clerk, bright beginner, neat, ambi-|Saleswomen, full time; also 9:45-3 or I- 112 WEST 42D ST. Boy, assist shipping; good pay, overtime; Clerks, dr J messengers; engineering firm. | Bune! ~ . : + Nes 
part-f I I 0 60 7 Av.| Wadsworth Hospital, 629 W 185tl isured’ 5 days: $28-$30. 370 7 Av (1607) |tlous, 5 da, 35 hrs, 25. MU 4-1100, Ext 12.\closing. Hearns, 74 5 Av MEN—BOYS qeety. advemt. Bryant Press, 52 E 19th modern office. Gibbs & Cox, 21 West 5 | Engineers, elec, mech Western Ele . 
light factory work 48 hours: $26.| Nurses attendants, nights-days, 9-12 hrs,|/Steno-typist, rapid; good salary; 5-day| Typist, expd, aceustomed detail work, ad-\Seclawomen full-part time. Personnel, Sth} SHIP-Pack-Stock $30-$45 oy, errands, Tearn trade; paid holidays- Clerk, inventory, garage; 5-d; some typing | Radar Mfrs Ah AVY & 2 
; th { » Mental Sanitarium, Croton 3663.)week. Security Mills, 1441 Bway, N Y vancement. Contempo, 9 W_20 St fl, James McCreery Av & 34 St STAR AGENCY. 147 NASSAU ST vacation. Michael Press, 145 W 45th. _| Breyer Ice Cream, 34 St & Qns Blvd, LI¢ jEngineers, elec. mech Western Ele 
1 BOOKKEEPERS, exp, $45;Clerk,$35-$37 |Boys, 16-17, light machine work, inexpd; | Clerk, liquor store, Manhattan; state age,| Radar Mfr 29 W 42 Da 
Rm 812, 19 W 34th. ,experience, salary. K112 Times | Engineers, E E or M E: post-war epoty 


st a 





frirls, 
United Spring St ty - saci 
lamp shades; Office assistant, will teach switchboard.|Steno, outstandingly fine character; enthu-|Typist, for lettershop, good rate; days or|Saleswomen, 25-45, for bookstores: full & 
perm, adv: $22 st. Luminart, 146 W_ 25th.|/Wadsworth Hospital, 629 W 185th jsiastic, initiative; write. Gerdau, 82 Wall.jevenings. 216 E 45th, 4th fl. part time. Womraths, 203 E 18 St. __—|_ INVOICE clerk. knowl Spanish $35_|52 hrs, $34.80 start. Rm 812, 19 W 34th. _ le 
Giris, oppty, intelligent; stockroom; $27.60,|Office workers, 17-30,: no exp; advance.|Steno, expd, know! Monitor board; : Upholsterers, custom-made  draperies;|Saleswomen, steady employment. Lerner WEHINGER SERVICE, INC. Boys, 17, shipping, 5-day wk; $28.70;\Clerk, general work; state age, experience,|1 Audubon Av 

44 hrs. Empire Button, 12 W_17tt |Apply 8-11:30, Gristede Bros, 1881 Park Av.joffice. Write Freiser Co, 250 44 St, yn.|steady. Supreme, 1975 University Av. Bronx/Outlet Store, 8 E i4th. whe si 180 BWAY, N Y C 7. steady. 34 Cooper Sq (E 6th & 3 Av). |salary. 630 Times, 217 7 Av | Engineer, ice machine 
Girls, handy with scissors; cut, trim, slope; Office girls, 40 hours, 5 days; $97 month; |Stenographer, intelligent beginner; good|Usherettes, full & part time. Apply Man-|Saleswomen, full, part time, occasional HOTALING, 117 LIBERTY 8ST Boy, shi ping dept, supervis oppty, perm|Clerks, accts payable-receivable; ng. Chief Engr, Hotei D 
laces. Rhythm Lingerie, 136 Madison Av. jadvancemt. Best Foods, 88 Lexington Av.|salary. 145 Nassau St, Room 917. __—ijager. RKO Palace Theatre, Bway & 47th. |days. Stern Bros, 42 St-6 Av Call in person. Many fine openings or till dftd. 5 da. Hall Bros, 7 E 37th. General Agency, 132 Nassau St |Engravers, expd steel stamps: 
Girls, 16 & over, full or part time; light|Office giris, 5 days, 7 A M to 4 P M; $22.\Steno-typist, salary open, perm, oppty.|Usherettes, full-paft time. Brooklyn Para-|Saleswomen, fashion accessories, no exzp|/ WALTER LOWEN 420 LEXINGTON AV Boys, asst stock & shipping clerks, chil-|Clerk, auto repairs, 40 hrs; ; |steady pos assured. Sossner, 1 . 
work; overtime; gd pay. 45 W 18th, 2d fl.|MU_ 4-4500 after 9 A M. ___.| Metropolitan Laboratories, 874 Bway mount Theatre, between 10-5. Ss nec. Arnold Constable, 5 Av & 40 St. | HDQRTRS FOR ADVTG PERSONNEL dren's headwear: good opty. 8 fl, 131 W 35) McC. & B.. 1221 Bedford Av cly Errand boy, 40 brs. 5-day. Englander Cy 
Giris, steady, post-war factory wk, gd pay, Office girl, pleasant conditions. Pitometer Steno, typist, general office wor aceu- Voucher clerk, also typists. Hotel Park Young lady, sell greeting cards; no exp; WILMAN AGENCY Boy, learn jewelry mfg, errands. Berman, ' Clerk, mail _ Apply Personnel, 10-1, Jay 1° > ’ 

40 hrs, no standing. Cello, 350 W 3ist. Log Corp., 237 Lafayette (nr. Spring). rate at figures; opportunity. ME 5-2259. Central, 56 St-7 Av. good salary. Artistic Gift, 221 W 34th. 11 JOHN ST : 102 Cana! St. Thorpe, 25 W 56th. c 


Giris, assist shipping dept 

















tine m Following Pace 





: al SEE sees nos : : a 
38 THE NEW YORK TIMES, NOV. 1, 1944. _|ortice nor, neat appear; acctng firm; 514|Pressman, also asst pressman; Kelly B &|Toolmakers, exp jis & fixtures: plenty Sales Help Wanted—Male ' Situations Wanted—Male Household Help Wanted—Female Household Situations Wanted-Female 


j|days J. K. Lasser & Co, 1440 Bway Miehle vertical. WA 5-0676 overtime. General Floorcraft, 333 6 Av « . - . SAAN aS — . — 
' -of- 5 alesman, fine men's we whdys, 5-9 ACCOUNTANT, senior, broad experience, |Cook-houseworker, expd; reference; sleep/CAPABLE girl mind children evenines, 
Help Wanted—Male | Machinist, out-of-twn ladies underwr plant; | orice boy, steady; 5 days. Apply J. M,|Printers, experienced on Michie vertical,|Tool & diemakers, Ist class; day & night PM. Sat 2-10 P M. W1121 Times Harlem.| available 2 to 3 days weekly; $15 per dayjout: 2 adults. EN 2-7304, 175 W 76th, 11A.| 170 St-Concourse " 


—_- pty. Seamprufe, 148 Madison Av, N Y | 4 . also 0 ZE. , " P Ww 19 St - _ = ae 
Continued From Preceding Page sam <1 ot coeceal ~ Mackay, 5th floor, 100 E 42d ulso_on jobbers. _ZE88i Times enttts. Ames, 33} Salesman, small retail furniture; big oppty|W!th accountant. T319 Times Cook-housewkr, no laundry, ne thorough) JE 6-038). 6-7 P_» - 


: . ™ » . Printers, feeders & comps; &85c hr st+over- ’ ° nd machinist: ov-|, 19 T > » 200: . 

Errand boys. easy; 35-hr, 5-day week; $25 cre rng Abcley Me Varici wR, | Office boy, errands, mailroom; permanent; time. Wallace Brown, 385 Gerard Av. Bx rg gy Rg 55 W 13 st.|for build-up; exp. K212_ Times ACCOUNTANT, excellent private exp; col-|cleaning; refs; good sal. AT 9-6503 Empicyment Agencies 

frems & Bolet. 68 Cortlandt St = r _—- -—— ass |5-day ». Geyer Pub, 260 5 Av Print i, Lita Giant, Kluge. Miehle Tool-inst ent maker revision exper |>alesman, expd gift, novelty furniture;| lege graduate; passed CPA examinations,| Cook, colored; first floor; $35 wk; other Por RELIABLE DOMESTICS See 

Esport assistants, specialists in chemicals|Machinists, toolmakers, Ist cl; excel pay: /qeg, ; 38 draft exe day or night, 42 EB 19th (34 floor). {ey oe Qusens Bled. [tc |Bronx resident, 18 West Fordham Rd desires position with future. O252 Times,| help; sleep in. RE 7-1173 THOMA 
“7 ex R1048 Times Downtow post-wa Empire, 151 Lafayette | see encens meer, over ov, OF Gre exempt ir — —— : : Ses z Salesman, expd, boys’ wearing apparel; ACCOUNTANT, auditor, year’s diversified Cook & chambermaid-waitress Conn 2 5 

oppt light work. Solar, 285 Madison Ay |Printing estimator and layout man; state/Tool designers; permanent. Carl L. Nor-iri, ty. Rappaport’s, 2307 Bway orivate years’ public exp, seeks re-jadults; perm. Morns, EN 2-3921, Apt 211/110-1127 1 : 

Export assistants, specialists in textiles for| Machinist, thoroughly expd No 2 centerless| Orfice boys, 40 hours, 5 days, $97 ih: |exp and salary, BB42 Times Bklyn iden, Inc, 50 Varick St, N Y ne_ opp appar ave y , , Dp. 8 ’ . : ’ 

export R1046 Times Downtow: lgrinder, Apply Rm 1924, 30 Church St, N +e : a S > , ¢ MOBtN; |. = - f 65K I i Salesman, exp, retail furniture; $4,000.|"ponsible pos, private field. O475 Times. | Cook, houseworker; sleep in pid; execell| ALL kinds domestics, sleep in 

Papert assistants, s list food stuff ' - — Best Foods, 88 Lexington A\ | Printing, Web pressy brakempn; $55.50; /Tool designers-top notchers, essential in $5,000, give age, exp, refs K216 Times ACCOUNTANT, CPA, 38, available aboutisal: other help. 40 EF 88th, 128: AT 9-0 time i * Ame 

bay a pec jalists in food stuffs |Machinists, Ist class, expd; good salary, Office boy sleasnt whe siti Pit i vacation Art Color Prtg, Dunellen, N J.jdustry Sherman Assoc, 63 Park Row : i 11 T fust A 
<* Baeel. sles Downtown ertime Ber ja 25 _W_ 261 let I rp “237 I fayett f or Bs ; ng). *rintin stimator-cost acct, early %0's,) Tool k ist cl ji fixture sm mach Salesman, flay matis, capable, drive, 25% A imes:|Cook-houseworker; expd BE adutts high wile, ee 

/ ete Og 37 afayette (n Spring) i g ¢ ator-c¢ ect, j | wlmakers s ec gs, s, P we ° 2.4 © iT iT Md 5-\ sa slee o CC 7 ’ “ . 

Fxport, young man, ‘seed at figures op-| Mac he opers, prodn; engine lathes, drilllO¢tice boy, office work, errands: 40 hre /@ssen work, future oppty. K223 Times Iparts. Varick Machine, 304 Hudson St travi: will train, fut; sal open, CA_6-2910 |ACCOUNTAST. CPA, broad senior exp; 5 salary leep in-out. SC 4-51 NURSES < Ovi RNESSES ONLY 

- ' K ne - ‘ite. Bonu WO 4-863 > , , as; Ars,| Salesman tobacce pouches; 10% comm. day week $85 _no travel. V529 Times Cook-houseworker, 9% till after dinner; a . A . 

: | grndrs, day, ni eee. ei PI 1688 Production, asst, cosmetic mfg & assembly,|Tool & die makers, first class, Sim, 421) 7) ~ 99 Time ACCOUNTANT. Ir, 27, 1 year's experience; |$25.60. Call LO 1834. after 6 30 606 MADISON AV . 
Evelet toolmakers on Waterbury Farrel Machinists, ‘lathe opers; post-war. Ippo-loffice boy; 5 days t d ; apable supervising, M644 Times Canal St (near 6th Av }VA_6-4972,_or write O —— wage Fa age & . - i bee : a 3 ICAP ' 
. ib nlary. X2754 Times jlito ncore (ne 143 St, S E Fr mes pormancEs; Sevense ——— — Sales 1 food co; dept stores, food) full-time position. ©2851 Times Cook, white; sleep in; references Apt! ABLE, dependable domestic help 
pitt 101 Co 1A neer 222 5 jment. Lily-Tulip, 122 E 42d [Production mer, cutter for roll or girdle|/tool and die maker, post-war, ample overt; |>*°°* ert ant hm PE . 43209. ACCOUNTANT. office manager, 70 yrs’ di-|/ 5G. 480 Park Ay 4 mediat ferences 

Factory supt, prod sheet metal plant; en-|Machinist, set-up man, BAS autom. Union| Office boy future in sales work: start $95\Piant; excellent oppty. K115_ Times good wages Nat'l Photo, 44-01 11 St, LIC outlets; salary, travel * ; fied e: : oy lohan 069 Times a — Votir A E 4-0 
eye g training: post-war. BC484 Times.|Park Mfg Co. 125 Ashland Pl, Bklyn oan’ AM tape ed Pre wary Timea Prcaciien aaa iethat “dae saat Gaadlcltedl’ i dicaialaia, tak cl aoa eae. Gee Sales mer, Cleveland, furniture, toys, ete. vers! lec _ exp, g00 organiser 6s nes. | Cook-houseworker, best; lovely home > uneniand Kemete 2 
Feeder, die cutting; good pay. panes, hol- | Machinist-general, lathe, shaper, milling | Office mer, exp with office procedures, Ige|Mailings, etc; excell salary. K183 Times.jovertime. Box 5S, Union City, N J $6,000-$7,000 sal. Clarke Agcy, 116 Nassau . OC ate “7 ote h — — ; : - ick, ; 3 Part-f time, investigated domest 
ays. Vacati Freedman, 12 Duan t imachine ermanent w¢ 2 9-2040 | oe ‘ - Ss f . . — 00) ousekeeper, colored; light laundry; 7 ~~ ——— - 
_ 282 — ~ ak: a permanent work. BR 9 manuf concern, outside city. X2733 Times.|Promotion editor, thoro knowl food mer-|Tool, die, gage makers, Ist cl; helpers; cdi no nights. 5 ot oe eel ACCOUNTANT, bkkpr, diversified experi-|sieep out 30° week. Phone JE 7-0390 DOMESTIC. industrial, commercial; fuil- 


Feeder, universal press, to feed aie |Machinist- die setter. Zierick Corp, 385 2 q . se at 0 : 127 avy. post- ‘ Ww rraft. 245 E 91 ” * time eron En tT! 2 x 
O hrs. Imperial, 252 Newport St, Bklyn/Gerard Av, Bronx \miat 4,’ : a P M, 5-day week; |Chandise; nat’! food public. K127 Times.|pay, post r_oppty ngeresS, Se hE” coma specialty salesmen. short bours,| ©mce: desires position. 0493_Times.__|Cook-houseworker, white, Protestant fam- ~ — Car a Sum. 40 > 
dto A 5-97 


Bester, pe ar mocaagni Hag Richmond Hill|Machinists, Ist class, all-around work;| : a |Proof boy, expd, S40 week. Cooper &/Tool & model maker i mfg com-)osod com. Realsilk, 11 W 42d ACCOUNTANT graduate, expd junior seeks|ily; prevailing wages; perm. BU 8-2922. |HOUSEWORKERS, experienced help maids, 
“Retord. 87-11 118 St, Richmond Hil ver 30: $1.30 hr. Evans Assoc 50 E rhs rage 2 seve; © Gays soveneeseas. Canedin | Coben, Ene,_ 332 Wot a past <= a me a —— jy.|From “Missouri’’? Watch us sell ed sve.|__Position with CPA O78 _ Times Cook, white, light housework; excel sal; ame Wa as, pal . * 
~ —— got agente ae gg |Dry Ginger Ale, 100 E 42 St. Rm 1524. |Proof-press oper, Vandercook repros, type,| Tool designers, sheet writ, N J; exe oppty.|—.) iraw Vs co 50 Pk iw 5).| ACCOUNTANT; 4 yrs’ exp, desires CPAlroom, bath. Central Park West, SC 4-3030 |°Tenc  -  _ es 
Fee oder, 1 feed small Gordon & “help in shop; |Machinist, general ge ig work, ma- Office boy. intelligent. oppty business|g00d pay: lot of ovt. CA 6-1786 Apply to 6 PM, 1 Audubon Av (W_ 165th) Sal or draw vs comm. 60 Pk Pl, Nwk (415). firm: 5 ye ie — piv? Times oom, 1. Cen ‘ es Ho SEWORKER ciiislest: Ee tues od 
orrtime WA 939-1696 shop Room 327, 621 Bway e j ind Rr eo 630 A Ip il —— hich os a Traini psychol, rehabil; coll, HS Careers; sal or draw vs ey! x. sve. 1 . das PA t 4 Cook-houseworker; $150; young; full chee : iOME ERVICE A 
a jcareer, good surrounc tm 860. 630 5 Av |Pullman conductors; high school educa-|Training, exp psychol. re + com, > 1509 W ? 2-5 ACCOUNTANT, CPA, can service few ad-|children 9-13. ENglewood 3-2276 lect = : ————_ 

Feeder, die- cutting press; steady Wolf| Machinists, expd and beginners, ey Office boy, $23, adv Apply Rm i2ii.|tion. Pullman Co, 24-12 Queens Pl, L 1 C.|/grads: near N Y. 58 E 65th, today, 10-7.|” Willis _Av (62), Bronx, 2-5 P 3 ditional clients, Cohen, LO 3-5029 oo : .. ~ : | ar RSES. governesses, permanent & tem- 
Die ing, 34 W 17th work. Oluf Mikkelsen Co, 393 4 Av, NYC.|, Ww 4 PP . See sales made! $40 sal or draw vs comm; Cook, general housekeeper, small Park Av terre 

— r — - \4 W 42d |Purchaser, textiles, cotton and wool; $7,200.|Turret lathe hands; day & might. Preei-))o igo cc) aroge - . ; 9-1 |ACCOUNTANT; will accept additional Ee —~ bath RH 4-7558 | ary siting irses . , of 

ile clerks, expd da ublisher r Machinist, all around, perm, centrally lo- E lead 1 area Edsve, 2 W 45, 7 f! 1 apt; good salary, room & ba ' 2 r 

Tur :  * 2 Pha ry b . ae, = . ane, | Office boy, errands, $140 month; 6-day| Provident Agency, 2 W_ 43d sion, 350 Pearl St. Bklyn : , ' : : clients; complete service; reasonable arly. Ramsay-D ; 8-24 
hy. 12 fl. 119 W 40th. PE 6-1500.|cated; essential plant: ovt. X2628 Times.| wep; 112° E 19th (Room 501 . eo ee b i ‘aid Turret lathe operator Edmos Products Career opp! Live leads! Draw against coms. Zwicker, BE 3-4755 Cook-houseworker, sleep in; no laundry: 
3 3 | i 20” swi i : = = ee —emee, C5D Sea CF Ces; . 7 Enc Br a, 342 Madsion A : we Mei — excellent salary. 430 E 86th. Apt % 
pes Room 43-09-47 Av | Machinist oper, jathe =0 Swing. casen ind; | Office boy no exper nec: $23 start; ad-|permanent. Mt Vernon 8-3815 Corp, 13 Christopher Av, Bklyn : itannic h cnx Li ACCT. with CPA, audits, writeups. taxes. = = salar g Househoid Situations Wanted—Male 
H perm. Surface Transp, 129 St-3d Av ancement. Mr Healy WI 2®-840( a 8 t “ Asst manager, expd 5e-$!1 store; sood sal- 4 - General houseworker, good pay, cood home, Ri TLER. valet. cooking italian —<—— 
Fireman, fo th Appl 3|Mail re lerk 1 Glan en ee , Radio service men, charge dept and store; |Turret lathes, #4 W & 5S, set-up & oper...» 1 O Grand, 25-27 Bway, Astoria legal_ background: $50. 0268 Times. _|ng laundry: two adults. Call KI 6-4044 |" eee pees ° > . 
oe ee eee ee OE, ee tee ee ae ae cae ei Offset stripper, expd color-black & white;|post-war oppty. 258 Lexington A\ nights; bonus! Overtime! WO 4-6635 ACCOUNTANT, thoroughly exp, desires pt| ¢ ent, bache : 1688 

Ove Pkwy. Bklyn hr $26.45. Lerner, 354 4 Av (3d fl Isteady: good pay WA 5-6850 j a Men, 3, $8 day draw vs comm; new $1 wk , General houseworker, under 40; ref; sleep! CHAUPFEUR handyman onmetiaun. i. 
ee ae | Mall clerk ge jstes a | A_5-685 Radio engineers, electronics; good oppty|Typists, for letter shop; good rates; days)ioem.” Encycloped Library, 1440 Bway.morn,|.time position with acct. K231 Times in own room. RH 4-4228 teltioame tea a 
. . ay Apply Supt, 15 Park Av/Mail gl - ggg advancement./Offset LSB pressmen, color wk; benefits,;now & post-war. TR 5-0426 or evenings. 216 E 45th, 4th fl Bast ine, ones aout wensnaiaae oaeaiean ACCOUNTANT, books opened, kept; $10 Oe On yg RO a ellig 4 ' i jariem 

: 110 _per_mon 96 Tim future. Novelart, 36-30 33 St. LIC [Radio wiremen testers, expd. Air King/Typist-file clerk rapid beginner; 5 days;| it) ) ne OPPAy ee ee ied ‘|__monthly; taxes. Goldwater, HA 2-8970. looking, no laun. 116 E 53 St, Apt 4C, $100 a excellent chef, highest recom- 

5-3 —_ ; d E 53s t ations ty . - 


Fireman high class apt bid 7 |Mail el 5- $21.5 Si: i 3s 745 ; 
: g; $117 month-|Mail clerk, 5-day week; $21.50 start. Sales|Qij jurner service men. expd. Pet 422|Radio, 1523 63 St. Boro Pk, Bklyn good pay and advemt. Duden, BR 9-7454 ASS’ i il 4. 23 i. 
ly. See Supt. 129 E 82 St |Affiliates, Inc., 730 5 A . | t 2. 78K » BORO, 868) : - z ; = Salary-commission, exceptional o 7 life|A5S5T executive. coll grad. 27. ve €XP| Girl, housework, plain cooking; sleep in-| o . nent 
E St <a jE 47 St. PL 3-7690 |Radio workers, expd-inexpd, war work;|Typist, downtown, 6-10 P M; addressing). ae thoro training MPnone Ch 5.3720 sales, correspondence. marketing. con- good sal TE 7-2486 1-3. evening COOR, excellent houseworker eat Jap- 


Fireman for small hotel. See Mr. Knecht,/Mail clk, messenger; 40 hrs; oppty, large/Oij } > » | wo > ’ a , ones s St m 50 _CA_o-: . ibutn. mer'dis’g. 0439 Times.|°% 
20 Uk ° il burner service man, expd. OL 2-4311.|g00d pay. De Wald Radio, 440 Lafayette St.jenvelopes. 11 Stone St_ (Roo 1 ecnelaan Shee Gah an Geaak Gs came tacting. distributn. sg . 


X f NYC jconcern; good sal Bicknell, MU 3-8110 . ; = - ? ’ 
= - _ — - Operator, head, char dept ladies’ hand-| Radk y an, : tunity;|Ushers, full & part time. Apply Manager. ~ . AUDIT direction, responsible governmental 
Fireman, heating season, small bidg;|Maintenance man, good hours; pleasant lags tend Smee Pre eo Times od Cay. Pama. oan — —— RKO Palace Theatre Bway & 47 St ed_svc. 161-19 Jamaica Av_(613), 3-5 P M 


AToAE : 
| Operators, expd, Puritan mach; good pay,|Radio repairman, expert, experienced;|Upholsterer, also springer; steady. 


-7976 


full I 














‘ ese. ex best efe A 3 


Girl, yng, companion yng girl, preferably, FAP ANESE cook housework smail famil> ; 


and industrial cost experience, currently|52™e _exP-training mental wk. K136 Times.| reference Kole. 1 : 


=\Boys, veterans (disabled), local circula- 27 Girl-woman, light housework, 34 rooms; 
191 — er contract termination; $8,000. X2704 Times » Ue ~ 2 Employment “heonaios 
Con, Position :_advance._comm._CT_7-5186. |BARTENDER, Al mix drink man, prefer|s!ccP_in-out. WI _6-6236 COUPLE, cook equals chef. expert bailers 





Ss. McMurray, 217 Bway jconditions. Kenmore Hall, 145 E 23d 


Fireman, porter exclusive _apartment | Mntnance— men, molders, mach, set, grind) ov or:imo “— . ry ne 0) . iw ~ Ps 7 , J 
- a“ -- overtime United Luggage, 28 W 23d perm; $60-$100 weekly. TR 4-5630 7 Av. N Y: Sterling a la : “ = : 
s ood wages. See Supt 45 E 57th.|knoves, woodwg plant. AL 4-6400. Mr Male| ; = = an s . . — : Canvasser, rockwool home insulation; $1| cocktail lounge, club: 15 years’ exp: can Governess-nurse, Florida winter; 2 girls le ae P a “ 
Fireman, apt house; good salary inou |Man, learn key punch & tab mach; short| one aaa = ae. oe good eral Mig & Eng C ofio9 steuben St. Bkiyn eg TS GE ee hr, plus comm. Major, 785 Bergen, Bklyn.|take charge: consid anywhere V401 Times|aged 4: capable; $150. X2631 Times Leathe ma On. housework 
Supt. 1 Riverside Dr ; jtrain d sal; perm.1412Bway Pers dep| —— ————>- = Rw — : “_-t Young man, retail clothing store. Miller's, ; ; P sicharge. | ‘fan 
up’ K el. a good sal:r 412Bway,4 fl sd P| Optician, experienced shop man, filter,|Radle service manager, ae ‘exp: ai.|Ushers, full-part time. Brooklyn Para- isee Sathin’ Av Brook a BOOKKEEPER, 39, en office Geverness, _ com x nildren 5 adu far . : y ; 
Firemen, porters, elev oprs; $30 up, ad- jMan or boy, no exp, light work jewelry) adjuste ME 5-0606 tractive sal. Heins & Bolet, 68 Cortlandt St.|mount Theatre, between 10-5 oe y —| routine: 9 A_M to 3:30 515 Times o_o ! : |Anderson Ag ‘ . ‘ 
ancmt tel Oxford, cor 112th & Bway i! ouse: oppty. Room 703, 62 W 47th — — : . - ; ~ : . : oys, travel, assist cire mgr, com, expen- CHAUFFEUR, 39. to 3 ee pri-|Hsekpr-nurse, young; New London, Conn... COUPLE - = hauffeur 
Fireman. for apartment house; good pay iMan, take charge retail Jewelry, promo-| oy cometrist. al erection Xai ones ed ee ay Pg Ko, oe a oy pA My | ey ses. Lake. Hotel Woodstock, 43d off Bway vate position: 19 yrs’ an trustworthy, |S¢rv_man, wife, inf; $150. CH 4-0300, Ext 27 years’ ex —_ 7 — er 
Apply 322 W Ss ition, advertising £242 imes : - — : of S : —- aes elas : a y rare river ‘ 325 8 - ° > 3 i} ‘RN [ENC 
2 Ss , : advertising K242 Times , Orderly, private hospital. Call Miss Rus-|Radioman, outside estimator, regular hrs;|Wall washers. Apply Housekeeper, Hotel! Situations Wanted Female—Ag neles|*°ry careful driver; refs. T325 Times zaeasshouper cost, young sleep in; refs |MODERN AGENCY 
Fireman, apt house, stoker; days; rm, $11 Man, 50-60; light work; generally useful,|..)) pe 9-14( 5. $78 | , . |Pie t Pierrepont St, Bklyn : ; CHAUFFEUR, routeman; available Tues-|5150 monthly. AT 9-7 | 
. : : , $117 b sell, RE 9-1406 $65-$75 wk Fred's Radio, BO 8-1116 errepon ” rrepont = io BOOKKEEFPERS, stenographers, full charge days, Thursdays, Saturdays. Sundays:|Housekeeper, plain cook; sleep in; 4 rooms,| Merchandise for Sale 


fo eady. JE 7-7700. 45 V s7 th ronx.j/érrands; $25 start. Woolford, 239 E 44th , 5 9 
E 0, 45 W 167th, Bronx : ; |Packer, expd porcelains; 40-hr wk plus|Real estate canvasser, exp preferred; $35|Warchouse helper wanted, 665 New Lots) or assistants; excellent type office help.|wit) aiso accept other work. X2728 Times./2 children; $125. WI 8-3737 | 


aaer ent 





Baby Carriages 
|PRE-WAR perambulator, like mew 


reasonable ‘ 


Fireman, days: $30 weekly. Supt, 400 West Man, mechafically inclined, help in ma- 
End A r 79 St ichine shop; 75c hr. Cronite, 67 Fulton St 


a“ | ® 
St Newark N 


Fireman, & hrs; apt house; $123 mo. Supt |Man as porter and truck helper; old re wertime The F : cate “a : 4. > 1447 Vv er ~ * 
. x ; § ols ~ ~ a ) me h an Co *S 5 AV salary plus commission BO &8-2330 Av. Bkliyn. DI 6-3447 an Tyn Agency WI 7-713! " 
8t CO 5-9394 jliable concern; steady pos; $30. BR 9-7377.| . ‘ ; ; CHEF, A-1, copious exp, many yrs with|Housekeeper in small Catholic rectory near 
|Packers, shipping dept; gift ware, glass,|/Receiving, shi x Warehouse clerk, familiar with warehouse) Secy-Steno, $3! , Bkprs-Asst, $35- $50" - & - , + 7 nan? , —- 
~ Fireman, apt house, vacuum system; good Man “me car, light deliveries Menu Art) i naware po pref Scr Mart. 62 ty asth tee 2 Ww —: ppies clk. De Pinna, 6th records and procedure: oppty. K180 Times.|FULTON AG OQ 7-7392,|concern of nat! reputation. ¢ I 7-0857 N Y¥ City. X2532 Times : 
pay Vals 65 W_ 20th | Press E 4 St = a P , ‘ | ae : Ww od Raschel. A & L Koitting — CHEMIST (pharmaceutical), recent college|/Housekeeper, business couple; 2 children 
Fireman. low pressure: Sla-dav week. H|Man, for bakery, generally useful; no Sun- ' expe — "9 : ones yy pharmacist, New Jersey; full or ot ee “— nat d ‘ grad (B S), seeks position in chemical/$100-$125. Call CI 5-8000, 10 to 4 Susineen Sten Mauttnen 
2~d | ogee - u 4( > Union § : ! > » ¥ 0 K27! . ! 5 2 “ . cana oP o 
, - @ , mingdale 9 St jdays: good pay 5 WwW 56S Pack a f pp a. 5 1 Sq u a7 ; me; perm position X2758 Times s|Watelimaker, gd pap, none bal -expd man Situations wanted advertisements con- field: job with future. V406 Times Housekeeper; sleep in; 2 children; pleas | Bt RROUGHS bookkeeping machines 
Ares my 119 WwW Sis heute; sendy r ee 1 ~~ py anaes oF bids, pine need apply. Leon Deutsch, Savannah, Ga taining the symbol (w) are inserted || CLOTHING salesman, topnotch appearance,jant, comfortable; $125. WA 8-42 |} statement and ig F; 
4 ee : monthly. See Supt, 151 Central Park West Waichace aaiscliler stares 36 et & by ex-service men and women. personality; salary important. V533 Times|ffousekeeper-cook, charge boy 10 hotel apt;|chine, private MI 23-3074 ’ 
Fireman, high pressure boiler, 48-hr wk |Man-boy, porter and errand work; toy | Mieco “Tho Bw hg a or Bisel KEAN Soto. geod pay, menks. reliable: $140 seanaie start. AC 2-2093 i COLLEGE GRAD, 30, technical dexterity,|maid service. Call mornings, BU 8-4918. | 
52 sli] Mr. Hammons "YT 3.450 ’ishop. Reiss Bros, 54 E 59th o— : - =~ — : ze}, 3 £-99 aE senate ; - —; — . learn post-war skill. O278 Times Housekeeper-cook; sleep out; professional 
~ == 3 ae LE /Man woodworking exper, plastics shop. Packers & shipping room, 40 hr wk. plenty|Research director, market analyst. to 35, high salt ad ne Wat Nts Lafayette st Executive Positions Wanted—Fem DENTIST, 45 years, expd operator and couple; good salary. TR _7-9385 ‘BIND eT? ar gaa eared 
, , ’ lovertime E268 Sth fl »mpsev .|P » $7.5 nc ncy. 630 § i sa dams Watch, 1! afaye § 7a ; ¥, ST, 45 3 : ; o orti 
ertime. 11 E 26 St, 15th fl. Mr. Dempsey. jPa. 1 7,500. Lenox Agency, 630 5 Av |2igh BUYER children’s wear, chain & depart-| prosthodontist. looks for a part. time|Mousekeeper, elderly woman, small api tes te _— S. Lette < mpf * 





Firman, q 37 
an, fine apt bidg; $117. Supt, 410 E steady: psot-war Matzner. 28 W 38th oe ; =i - 
& ctevater oper; ss ment store experience. O83 Times position. O487 Times suitable compensation K 134 Times 


Foreman, expd, production large eenéey; | ide is clein Goutal office, tall or part Packers & order fillers, start $26.50; $33.50) Restaurant help, full-part time; no expr Watchman (nights) 21-10 400? vy. LIC 
jin 4 week 40 hrs. McCrory, 76 9 Avy Schratft #86 Fulton St, Bkiyn $39.52 wk. Apply Supt 1-10 49th Av « Carpers and Kugs 
le u it LABOK major secks personnel or public re »*RAFTSMAN * at 6 Housekeeper, sleep int work in Yonkers 
|Packer, table work in modern bindery;|Rigger, foreman, chemical plant; good) Watchmaker, importer, excellent oppty for) Viiinine position requiring research and DRAFTSMA! piping, chemica power! x sal Yonket 1-1975 (collect JANN'S RUGS, all sires (ened 
experience, Box 166 White Plains, N Y Plants heating ventilating plumbing | 


l trac rs ar cor Time te ead yost-wal BR 99-6366 |}post-war pro t M638 * Ve iright party Omega Watch Co, 608 5 Av | eke : 
ractors, knitwear. K233 Times j prosne , Times specifications: 25 yrs’ exp. 0224 Times.|Hskpr., white, for elderly lady; own roomy) ood . . ’ 
. ‘ 


| | ake . 
Foreman war work, expd machinist, sewing|Man, run stock room: asst mer: seed sal expd dresses assist shipping Santa Claus, fond of children, pleasnt, exp Watchmaker, there CP, ropes, mae grade ISECRETARY, correspondent, 15 years’ ex-| $100. UN 4-1156. 410 Central Pk W OA 
y r P 1 salary ‘RW 237t 24 f | nost wa pt Lamston. 2680 Bway (102d i » Hess, 1400 Bwa junec Apply Saks-34th, Bway casing Louls Alsenstein, 6 o AV | perience desire responsibility detail [ELECTRONIC inspector, asst radio engrs, | Housekeeper. business couple, live in, take 
dresses; good pay, overtime; oppty|Screw machine operators (hand); high) Watchmaker, excel oppty, Ist-class man/knowledge steno, bkpg; $45. BO 8-6252. | part time, eves. CA 8-2700, Ext 16. after 6. /onone messages: attr rm. bath. TR 800 |USED rugs, real bargains, ©1 
63 34 A ‘ 





opportunit AV 826 Time jtime: gd sal. Dr. Lunenfeld, 80 Delancey St 
Foreman-assistant, expd, soldering cold|Man, experienced, familiar handling con 


qd VA f 


" a 





Foreman, permanent position, flavoring ex-|M } -re o 
tract nt. N Y¥ ( x 7144 Tir “oy . |Royal Ciflica Bees Gh’ tea ne were ‘ment. Sheila Lynn, 1400 Bway wages. Nathan Mfg, 416 EF 106 St only; perm; midtown; $80. _ K145_ Times PUBLICITY SECRETARY ENGINEER, executive, heavy tooling, elec-|Housekeeper, comp, German speaking; el-| 
. al fri supply 2 uane ; . - ne . oo — ° ; ° ° 1 : . t § 
Foreman, charge dress factory, $6-$7-88| Man, shipping dept, NY warehouse rub- lp ac hers, wholesale a house; 5-day, 40- Se rew mach operators, —— perms | bonggeg pee cape, ee essential —"s" Good background 0283 Times. _| tronic, productn managemt exper; excel-|derly lady; Great Neck: sm apt. MU 3-8948 a a : 
ye. Gertine Dress, Rm 702, 253 W_ 26th.|ber mfr: $140 mo. R1039 Times Downtown. |2!:_ Post-war oppy yons, 120 Duane St. |post-war. Aircraft, 1381 Lafayette Ave, Bx.|shop ’arker Watch ith lent refs: $10,000 minimum. V404 Times.| qq, . OS Sewsanew carpeting, runner 
t mfr n m r ) ; d s u pusekeeper; sleep in; small family; mid-| , » 
\Packer for printing plant; steady job; good|Screw mach ops, exp B & S; N. B. Gridley) Watchmaker, A-1; $75; in Long Island, Situations Wante Female town: ¢ nd salery. Call SA 2-4990 | linoleum, anes - se 


; - , : . - ‘ . , : “ « ’ “ good 3s . . . 
post-war. K156 Time 1$30. Sirls, 130 E 13th pportunt uth floor, 229 W_ 28tl automatic. Ippolito. 401 Concord Av, Brx.|35_ mg@utes from city, X2747 Times ADVERTISING or editorial work, college | ENGINEER, exec, 25 years’ exp, manufac ; cash a Ww 3 


Fareman, experienced assembling small de-|Man, receiving 5 ed 
: z | , g-stock work; 5 days, 40 hrs,| 
xz ” ture, development, mech'l, elect’!. tools,|/Houseworker-cook, 10-7:30; 2 evenings, 5's) 

Freight rate agents, 3 yrs’ exp Apply| Man, over 45, all around helper, steady RUGS, used, 


large Stock; tremendous re- 
Houseworker; sleep in; light cooking; 4 ductions Ir Ri gs ers. 1008 
|Packers and laborers, radio war plant;|Security corresp, investment pub, writing} Watch repair men, 10, broad exp; ed pay; | BOOKKEEPER, secy., expd, full charge, ELEVATOR operator, colored 5 Wises, yr as omiey ‘ean wk. RI 94485 |3_ Av ath op B ™ e's 


Freight opt-porter, good pay 4 mours. A v P P- ‘ y 
See a ~ Bids’ (a F urs p- —s = 8] ne a ldays. Hamilton Radio, 510 6 Av (14 5 exp desirable. R1049 Times Downtown perm. Bulova. 62-10 Woodside Av, Queens.| executive capability; 5 days; unusually M Atlantic Av, Bklyn 2. N CHINESE rug and throw excetlent 


Fruit men, gcood pay with = Suilloa| Me for shipping & packing; good pay |Packers, ladies’ apparel chain: 5 days,|Sheetmetal mechanics and helpers, expd|Waxer, on ladies’ gold rings; steady job. OKERLAT ol. 6-2472. VAl2 Times. EXECUTIVE bookkeeper, office manager, | ouseworker, L. e sate room; sleep in; ondition easona 1 ' 
F tere 92-17 New York Av, Jamaica.|overtime. United Luggage, 28 W 23d *|R00d pay Budget Shops, 370 W 35th iducts, ventilation: overtime. OL 5-6003 Peerless Jewelry, 15 W 47 St BKPR-STENO, full charge; 5 years’ expe-| varied experience production, buying, |$00d salary WE dL | Cats, Dogs and Birds Wanted 
Fruit-vecetable man, manager, exp; steady.\Man to work, luncheonette; $40 wk. 20 ckers, essential industry; post-war ofpy |Shipper, young, alert, good future, George| Welds, gas, aircft, Army-Navy; 
_ Produce Market, 301 Amsterdam Av |W 39t} Sunday off imer & Amend, Greenwich & Morton Sts.|Popper, 31 Union Sq, N ¥ C ovt Penn Mfg, 245 Glenmore Av BKKPR. full ch k i i 
Furnace man, low-pressure steam; no li-|Man (nights), elevator-switchboard. Hotel| Packers and shipping clerks, 75¢ per hour,|Shipping clerk, exp unnec, cotton goods;|Welder, varied aluminum exp; cood wages; taxes areas “ea — a — FOLDING paper boxes pressman or fore-\Houseworker, plain cooking: free wot apt) Electric Appliances 
c ‘ - oppty 4 E 39th La Saile. 30 E GO St Henry Rosenfeld, 498 7 Av good salary Gibraltar 8 Bway permanent. X2756 Times BOOKKEEPER ial la : = man, expert cutting and creasing, 20 yrs'\for your family: good salary FO 11) RONER 
Fur finisher, expert; good sal. Ritz Pur|Man or boy, shipping dept, light factory|Painters (10), union, exterlor. 411 @ Av|Shipping clerk, experienced, good pay; per Window dresser, exp, retall ladies’ ready oe ty a Loy; taxes; part-lexper cyl, platen presses. O254 Times " aden. lite cedite fall time: Ft il Phone FL 9-084 
»v th lwork: gd pay. 80 University Pl. 3d f! (28 St). Apply 5:30 P M manent; oppty. Revion, 619 W S4th to-wear; artistic; high salary. MU 5-445 = GOVT wage expert, present employe WLB,| fOuseworker : 038 SS | 


| j BOOKKEEPER, off mer, thoroughly com- . k Tryon section; $125. WA 7-866) |FRIGIDAIRE, exceilent condition 
Garace man, experienced, f N “ 145 < - |Paint sprayers, expd sheet metal r plant.|Shipping clerk assistant, good y, ovrtme.|Window cleaners, part-full time, swell job, ~ ~ ’ 4 draft deferred, seeks position post-war - -~ = a 
"R616. —— wae ye Butter,’ 365 ER) e Steel, 195 Front St. Bklyn 1, NY. Amicon Chatacter Dolk 119 W 24th, [swell boss, 41 Union Sq, Rm 817, 9:30 A M.|_ Petent, dependable; best ref. CL 8-1859./tuture. O72_ Times Houseworker, exp unnecessary; sleep in or) pals only. EN : 


BOOKKEEPER, executive, thoroughly exp, | HEAT f ide k led gout; high salary, small apt. ME 5-S6a6 | 
Garage man, ¢ au N a-| Ms : |Painter. Painting, ul r Shippir lerk Peoples Camdy Co, 419 wineew dresser, expd 5 & 1c stores; good . . age '|HE treat foreman, wide knowledge o | Housefurnishings 
: ) ‘st Ast ty I a eae pag ———_ ~ 2 — aie Apply Chief aaer, Yale "Club, a5 — 4 ay (39 St) N Y loth fl ’ salar post-war oppty. DP681 Times full charge; dependable; $50. V502 Times heat-treating, machine tool, gun & air-|Houseworker, plain cooking; small family; | 


‘ , 7 ‘ BEAUTIFUL 10-piece English walmet din- 
: . $ " t 17-4619 
Garageman, expd, drier & washer; good|Man, inside job, steady; $24 & overtime.| Paper bag foreman, flat & sq or S O §/|Shipping clerk, under 18 or over 45; perm Window trimmers; oppty learn window dis- mence, BU 2-8555. chars long experi-jcr ft pris 8 yrs’ exp: excel rep. X2762 Times ne urroundings 7s wv TR ae i] ing room A. i . ~ 
jays.’ Garage, 159 W 24 St, Mar 330 W 42d. Room 206. machines. RR723 Times, 2689 Bway 1440 Bway (40 St). Room 1170 iplay; no exp: 5da. D. A. Schulte, 386 Bway SoOKKEEFE -|HOTEL manager, 43, 13 years’ experience, oar 35° W 90th, Apt ett SC 4.3200 |!ving room set: 4 piece mode edroom 
Gardener, 2-acre estate, N. J.; steady po-|Man, young, shipping: $30 start, 40 hrs; |Passepatout or binding machine operator|Shipping clerk, knowledge typing; good|Wiremen, assemblers, experienced. Freed yhoo at ~ expert, ie 5 experi-| wishes to change position. T324_Times foe - wa ' i < . et 3 sets Lior trair . ‘ 
sition. good pay & cottage. MI 2-6466, |steady: post-war. 419 4th (29th), 8th floor. |0n_lamp shades. Call HA 2-647 post-war future. K179 Times Radio Corp, 200 Hudson St. N_¥ C PARL eee “ <7_____ | INTERIOR decorat’s, allied ‘business back- rm & bath: $150 ‘Mamaroneck 5 554 after 4.|practically new P sa nat 
avi o » . > s . LS a a7iti? € i fod ¢ = = —_ = = - 'e " ry D) ) ) T 2 — . _ 
Gay stati m_ attendant, expd lubrication; [a age ge Prime [Personnel & office manager, expd. larce|Shipping clerk, asst; perm; overt; packer| Young man, assist ship dept, wholesale c APABLE ——— office supervisor, per ground; young: excell appear; educated, Tes . vat nf ADD me 
stad oe meee al ~ yt — fp LD ag m Aa 3 wcheonette chain. Rudley 1117 6 An ladies’ coats, Linker & Herbert, 205 W 39 elec supply; 60-hr wk. Midway, 115 W 83d a. 8, & a a a, ——. ndus SOR OTNT ET eintcnee D185 Times. yy yt a ee until after din-| DINING room suite, complete. imported 
Z good § ays. § -95 Han rchie », 127 lee § : D hal tudley's. 76 Av.ji ; ; 5 " Ts er: na 4-7156 - 
Gen’! he s : ol : . ~ - ; an, packing, shipping; experi-| a Pt RR iY .|MACHINIST, maintenance, first-class, re- | English Renaissar n , 
Gen’ helpers r, other i, 5 _5 Gage, yap yg and charging. Alberi| Pharmacist, —_ Poy By work; Shipping clerk, need sift, Tine | pret 12 — 4 ledies? nine Paes x 491 7 AV ww 7 San ee experienced,| pairing, rebuilding machine tools; ref;|Houseworker, plain cooking; 1 to afteribeautiful ca x 
01 ee lv I sack, 48 V 7th jvran neours orner ns 4 3 > = 5 days 30 2 4 72 citizen. K., 200 F 234 dinner; 2 adults, child. TR 4-1775 iM o—4 ! 
clas we > - ; "har ~ inpl : y an, assist shipping room; $30, 5 7 ——_— x : 
< ass bi wer, oe “opportunity i high —. poner ween, 4 ange International) P00 sal: i expe. presertpttens. cosmetics; raat pe Reger: . ps | Se Be WA 9 wan © , DICT APRORE epevater, ae years exp; 5/MAN, 33, married, 10 yrs’ sales C2 = Hawrkr, 9-1, 6 mornings, cleaning, light|%! » A i] 
e r g 23-0700 alloring Co, 12 & 4 Av, 9th floor ‘< a = ‘ »- 90) 4 “ ‘ st, ~A04 - days: age 33; 5 X27 imes utive ability, pleasant personality; 45.jlaundry: $15.60 Klein, MO 2-3222 jpt e¢ PR 8 
Grocery cls no exp; ed 7 Apply R- wer, restaurant & bar, full che, Al ref, an hich pay, no cmnptoptnons ee gg ee car eoemnetse lab; 5- a OM RA y ng excellent DIR TITIAN, assiat part time hosp, school,|0272 Times = , 8 egg |ANTIQL BS. vreuss Leake XV ae Gk 
“a e Ved vristede Bros, 188 "ark. |Qonded. live on_ premises £149 Times ‘ 1d Phi d ine V 77 day »p p. 4 > - : dr's office prefer Man, Bronx. Phone MAN, 42, executive ability, bookkeepin RH 4- ‘ : : u 
Guard, 5 days, 5°11", 175 pounds. Call 5|Manager, store in Texas; no fee. Retail Pharmafist excellent post-war job. Fox|Shipping & stock clerk, good pay, full-| Young man, plating eo a s10, neces") mornings, JE 6-702) exp adaptable willing. O271 Times. : Hawkr-cook, exp, refs; L I suburbs <amali|De int and needle 
/ Roon 4 2 St Personnel (Agency), 450 7 A Agency. 1476 Bway (42d part time. Broadstreet’s, 141 Bway sary; good pay. 655 6 Av, Rm 3 EXPORT clerk, experienced shipping docu-|MAN, 42, attorney, desires commercial po-|house: extra help: $150. Morse, WI 77-4620 |410 Marlb sgt 
Handyman-porter, 23-35, Radio City, perm;|™Masseur, licensed, full-part time; salary Pharmacists, pre-meds, contact phys trade,|Shipping helper, light work; 40 hrs, 5|)¥Young man, home office; large chain) ments, billing. letters. credit, inventory; sition any capacity. ©O486 Times - | 2-6469 
. y p 5-35. ) City, :|M ar, ; . “Pp J . ‘Imet NY. NO. Broch Wr 2-sed Fang -- h, . ‘ pant A; . store organiz; oppty. 370 7 Av, 12th floor.|s.q +> f -vi™ ‘ : Houseworker, white; one adult, plain cook | 
I Cl 5-4400, Ext 1082 ps. MacLevy. 122 E 42 §S me rock 2-5840. Rm 928 |days: $29. Schuck, 215 4 Av. 8th floor g day week $45. O84 Times MAN with one-ton panel truck wants|ing: sleep in. 164 W 79th, Apt 12D ANTIQUE bed, household furn 
Handyman care furnace, small repalrs:|Masseur, licensed; full, part time; night|Pharmacists, full or part time Liggett|Shipping clerk, packer; excellent oppty;|Young man, charge shipping dept; £004 MOON-HOPKING biller 27,200, steno and) work TR 8-0025 flousework, aasist cook; Miami Meach;| %0nabie, se M- : 


P ‘ Mu Croton 2662 lwk: men’s Turkish bath. Lux BR 9-3630 (Drug Co, 71 W 23 St. cor 6 Av steady: S-day week. Pauker, 25 W 3ist oppty. Lady Ellen, 149 Roebling St, Bkiyn typist, thoroughly expd; 5 days O468 WAN. 36. desires Salurday employment, |$100: references. Box 150. Ft. Plain. N 1 at Ca A 
~ a . - . : *-ltween 6 P MO P 


HARGAINS, hich crade 


Packer, light work; advancement; $32.|Secty, exec, tech backgr; Indl exp; gd cor-|Watchmakers, expert; top pay; post-war) girl, primary interest writing. office exp > : 9 rs ’ " * $30 O 9-6984 
Airlines, 103 E 41 St.. N ¥° Nash, 67 Irving Pl (18 St—Lex ub Fluorescent Co, 275 7 A\ resp. Bulova, 62-10 Woodside Av, Queens |Oppty Roth Bros, 104 E 23d anxious to enter field V501_ Times patents H.S 429 _W 5 Av, Roselle. N J. |days - M = 


certified; |. rience capable; refs, & days; $35-$40.|seiiing capable adaptable responsible. | Houseworker-cook; sleep in; 3 adults, amall| POR ADOPTION pointer, male. youn 
Bklyn |V530_ Times Marcus, TO 2-6676 house, Mount Vernon 7-1830 collect | brown and w , . 





unused Horten portable, M-ince® 


5 ay MU 4-a861¢ 


apt 7 











Handyman-fireman, exper, $35 week. Hotel|Masse licensed, expd, capable and trust-| Photo-engraver, experienced photographer,|Shipping, receiving clerk; light duties; es-| Young mar; splendid oppty learn estimate, times \ ; experienced bookkeeper, K240 Times Houseworker-cook; $135; pleasant family; | 
r a t no WwW t iworthy, for inst in Florida M S61 Times,| [0% modern plant K163 Times sential industry steady. X2616 Times paper boxes. Gair Co, 75 Front St Bklyn | NURSE, Canadian RON, Gentile; industrial MANAGER, buyer, drugs, cosmetics, chain-jown room & bath SA 92-6184 - 


’ i 
Handyman, apartment house. Apply 140/Material handling methods specialists Photographer, enlarger, thoroughly experi-|Shi lerk tl id holidays,| Young man, intelligent, factory, perm, ea) or doctor's office O96 Times . t | ture floor ‘ 
’ i] Ay | Pp clerk, exp; overtime, pa olidays, } ; “ es store experience, inventories capable 
: : jwrite gd reports; sal, bonus. 22752 Times.|‘ need. Murray Korman, 675 5 A vacations: draft deferred. Mele, 150 W 224 |pay, 5 days. 116 W l4th, 7th fl PROOPREADER, oupe. cages reliable; Sihigh vol bus, retail, wholesale. 063 Times erences. "Telephone CAS saTe — ch Av, Bs 
PI P . . 7 ’ se) u7T, 217 7 ; - : on € . 
Helpers om trucks, $30 start Store, 9|Mechanics, expd Auto-car trucks, Apply P Photographer-retoucher, high-class men's Shipping clerk asst; brassiere manufactur- Young man, veteran pref, steno; perm) days margain at € 17 7 Av MECH engineer, 26, formerly Wright Ficld, |Houseworker-cook, no Sunday; room, bath, [DINING ro m, ld-piece walnet A. «ly 


St. NY ¢ _|M. Miller, 1400 Park Av, Hoboken, N J |Portraits; also all around. PL 9-4934 er; good opportunity. ZA887 Times with excel post-war fut. X2690 Times PUBLIC relations, also heavy research and| knows Portuguese, Spanish, seeks con-|radio: high salary. Great Neck 2872 collect | 


Helper on truck to install refrigerator|Mech engineer, machine shop exp, short |' %°tographer, gd salary. Apply E. J. Davis,|Shipping, gift ware, glass, chinaware; exp|Young men, draft exempt, 650 hr, adyemt,/ editorial exp. Call Miss Maloney, MU 2-!nect with opers Latin Amer. X2650 TimeS.|itouseworker, Mon, Wed, Fri, 8-4: 


|Phot ar, ; ee as per: $18 wk; _ ; 
eunits. Guardian, 604 W 37 St jorders: state age, exp, sal. X2599 Times. |222_Broad St, Newark, BI 3-3190 pref. Bar Mart, 62 W 45th steady, overtime optional. WI 7-9361._ _|6494._Write V542 Times. _____=__+=s_s_s_=sIS7FCHAN foreman, poo supervise,|refs. 890 Bushwick Av. Bklyn. GL 5-307 Yb aad hear | style hedr a 


- ; ip " ; ‘ - —— ; CP- ST, 3 3 3 
Hotel help wall & carpet washers, paint-|Mechanics, mach shop or inst mak’g exp Phen oo Ne asst. Albert Photo Stu-|Shipping clerk head, expd; $50; oppty: Young | — ay ottice a mn wr pl ay aa bd; know! tune up; top wages. 1233 Times Bronx.|tHouseworker, white; sleep in; 4 rooms, 2\sofa. $85. G c 
. e s. Victoria. 7 Av-51 St Western Elec, .561 Boulevard, Jersey City | 2/05. 403 Flatbush Av Ext. Bklyn Clover Bags, 329 5 Av or part time; oppty Ra. Se AEbTT — <=<>._____|/MOTION pictures, sales & technician, 20/aduits. 2 boys: good sal. SL 6-2274, morns |ANTTat FE Tudor oak banquet | tabie—board. 


Hotel clerk and cashier; high salary; exp,| Mech drafismen, some tool or mech exp;|/!0tosrapher for Army camp studio. Write|Shipping clerk, 5-day wk; time & % over-|Yng man, intelligent, ty waly. ao yt ee —* yrs’ experience (all around). X2705 Times.| tiouseworker, sleep in, plain cooking; own chairs: sacrifice om misceilae 
; ence. K135 Times top rates! Overtime! N J firm. WA 5-8420 [sore ines aack time. The Carter Ink Co, 434 Bway vo. Clean: _ 13 _Ave i dept; (SECRETARY Cheletlan well bred a ere Baye =" en owe room, $30 wk. MO 2-4-3317 = vus 

fotel help, he useman, $27.50: e¢ Mech! desi rs, j otography ark room workers, ex and/Sh ' “lerk, at & suit house; gener- foung man, assist owner, % ; . 7 ~ ~ wy - ’ a 0 ce etalis records mes 

dishwasher. $27: perm. 61 E oth oper*l equip: out of t Ce erguson, 25 W | beg nner Apeda, 212 W 48th we ally useful. Planet Coat. 237 W. 37th good salary. Reisman, 30 W 24th several yrs diversified exp, conecientious 


’ 4 ~ capable assuming responsibility V 1036 
fiotel night auditor, experienced; good|Mech! inspectors, radio comm ind; post-| Photographers printers and retouchers,|Shipping clerk, expd, glassware; good pay.| Young man, to read electric meters; perm, . 


hairs. exce 


sac EI 184 





rivate RE 4-500 


Houseworker; sleep in; nice home; own PENSIVE aft ‘ ch Freer 
PERSONNEL man, job ag — room, $125 mo. Teaneck 6-8199, collect wot tlor “a oe > tiques 
Times Downtown tion, placement, training, labor relations. |iyuseworker, complete chge 15-mo child;| ‘LLOYD 16 EAST 
P Jersey City |war oppty. Cardwell, 81 Prospect St, Bklyn.|!4e8! conditions. C. J. Villar, 4125 Bway.|Sun Radio Co, 212 Fulton St, N Y¥ advancement; 40 hrs. K1s7 Times SECY, background, personalliy, advertia-|;ormerly with Federal_Govt 0590 _Times.ino cook'g: sleep out; $30. Davis, PL 3-5145.|\WALNUT buffet. 7 and mirrer, «88, 

Hotel night auditor, NCR #2000 experience.| Mechanic, maint, auto powder filling, pkg’e| Photographer Ss printer, expd, portrait,|Shipping @erks, 2; no exp necessary; 48|Young man, hardware shipping; good post- ing, publ, edit, research exp; $40-$45.)PHAR. reg; $1.25 he; 16 yrs’ exp; prefer Houseworker, sleep in, no laundry or cook rR 7-762 A ; 
, Time a equip. Economics, 1075 Irving Av. Bklyn |Projection. Fields & Co., 9 W_20 St ihr wk: $30-$35. Dornich, 34 W 34th, 4 fi.) war opportunity R1053 Times Downtown |... Times position within 44 hour's riding time ing: $125. TR 7-7146 hid FURNITI Re BARGAINS AT 

; = a : - « ~ < “ ; 
Hotel waiters elevator opers, etc. Room 330,|Men, counter work: no exp nec. Miss Kan-| Photographer, comm photo co; all around|Shipping clerk, beginners & part time con- Young man, _excellent position; post-war SECRETARY-stenographer, extensive, di- Saratoga Av. Bklyn. O90 Times Houseworker, kosher cooking; own room,| LEXINGTON Wa _ : 

¢ xingt Lexington Av at h. juk, White Tower Rest. 731 8 Av (46 St r’s lic. BB49 Times Brooklyn.|sidered; oppty. Opera Blouse, 525 7 Av.|future 45 W_ 34th, 34 f versified exper, seeks interesting, respon-| PHARMACIST, Phar D, 44, 15 yrs, “retalllpath: no Sun: $160 month. TA 9-9090 |\®EDS,. mahogany trim, sicigh type. WY 
Hotel rm sery Supervisor; taproom capt;|Men, light factory work, cosmetic co; ga|Photographer, portrait exp; perm. Lincoln|Shjpping-order clerk, commercial station-|Young man, assist shipping clk; oppty Irn! sible pos, with busy exec: $40. D242 Times.|_ executive, 6 _ yrs manuf Vacs Tunes. csswesher, f woman im family: private| 2-5240 
: teward. Hotel Taft, 5ist-7 A\ |wages, 48 brs: perm. 4th fl. 67 Vestry St |Studios. 89-43 165 St. Jamaica. Mr. Otis.jery business; full chge, gd sal. HA 2-0090./trade; good sal; perm! 243 W 17th (9 1) | SECRETARY - stenographer, experienced PHARMACIST JR. 25 YEARS’ EXPERI-|room, bath; ' refs. K161 Times LOVESEAT bed. blue; $45. Call Apt 12D, 
Hotel room clerk, 100-room hotel, up-State.|Men, del telecrams before 9 AM; full part |Photographer, printer; good pay; ideal|Shipping clerk, full charge stockrm; good|Young man, handy with tools, steady) news service, engineering, real estate| ENCE. 0283 TIMES. "2 Houseworker-cook, small family, own rm,/| 7 West End A 


t. $40. 1J603 Times. |time. Westn Un, 311 Washington St,Bklyn jconditions. Camr-Arts, 4125 Bway, N Y. |figures: 5 days. Accessory, 6 W 37th post-war position. Levine Bros, 111 8 AV.) mtgs: perm: midtown; $40-$45. 086 Times.| PHARMAC , registered, exp, 2 evenings|hath tep_wages; refs. RH 4-6765 ANTIQUE furniture, tables. chairs, sofas 


Housemen-porters-firemen. Good salary.|Men, $35 start: light factory work. Keni|Potographer, young man, portraits, flash|Shipping clerk, printing exp; good salary.|Young man, oppty, retail jewelry es SECRETARY, steno, colleze grad; 4 yrs’|_°' few hours only. O91 Times. _|ijousewkr, genl, for 1 lady; New Rochelle:| desks. et De Pinna, 2 W 52 § 
f y Hotel Belleclaire, 250 W 77 St Stores, 135-32 Roosevelt Av, Flushing jexpd: out of town. PL 8-3000 Printline, 22 W 22d gen useful. Madows, 263 E Fordham R exceptional exper, alert, resourceful. TR| PHOTOGRAPHER, illustrat’n, commercial,|own rm, gd sal; recent ref. X2565 Times. |BEDROOM, tufied bed, chest, consoles, 


Housemen, permanent. Apply housekeeper,|/Men with cars, deliver telegrams, 12-8 AM Manhattan Cente darkrm wk; night clubs.|Shipping clerk, experienced, ood pay,| Young man, shipping & all-around; oppty; |2-7230 : do everything. Ross. HA 6-6798 House worker- =cook, no laundry, $135-$140;) mirrored vanity. study E 4-44 
St Regis, 2 E 55 St jApoly Western Union. 127 W 40th (Bway).|Manhattan Center, 311 W 34th, 4-6 P M.jhours: advancement. _ X2694 Times new firm. MU 6-6697 SECRETARY-sieno, exp, intelligent, per-/- PRESSMAN, cylinder, vertical, publica-|good home. SC 4-2104. 146 Cent P. W.(3G |FPINE draperies, bedspread, furniture. 19-4 


2 E 55 27 “= - 

Houseman, full, part time, days. The|Men, young, assist shipping dept, kinc,|Photographer, operator, retoucher, expd;|Shipping clerk for small printing plant;|Young man, strong, expd packer and sonable. desires interesting position: $35 tion. color_ halftone; days. D40 Times. | Housewker; = in; own room; army wife,| principals. 239 Central Park West (14D). 

Middietowne, 158 E 48t : af PS erical. WA 5-0300 a 22 ie Sey high salary, commission. X2760 Times 40 hours. Colortype Co, 32 W 18th. _ helper. 5 days. Katz, 101 W 37_St TR 8-5542 PRODUCTION control mgr, specializing}? children: $100: references. AC 2-0655 | gabIO. table model. fine furniture books, 

Housemen, good pa y, perm. Hotels Wel-|Men, exp unnec, factory work, overtime; Physical instructor athletic, exp, full, part/Shipping “clerk, light work; good future;|Young man, light factory work, 40 hours, SECRETARY, executive type, handle cor-| IBM; B. S, 1935 Johns Hopkins; TB) ygaiq, pleasant surroundings; 45 minutes) mic eilany Rm 1702. 18 E 4ist 

ngton. Winslow and others. 2347 Av 2 dvcemt, Heide, 313 Hudson, cor Vandam.|‘ime Roon’s Gym, 423 Lexington Av 9 5:30. Roamans, 20 W_39 St $30. Dispatch Photo, 207 W_25 St e respondence, details, etc: also engineer-|3'2 years aircraft exp. X2642 Times New York. Call Cedarhurst 3333 PICKLED pine fireplace. in —— —y —— 7 
S exp, excell “assist in shipping & cutting|ing exp; excel refs; $42-$45. 1320 Times. PURCHASIN: 3 agent, 10 years’ exp radio, |ygaid. full time, 5 rooms, housework, plain) dition: P jE §-748 


Hon e * sie | Men, r Pp F ——w | Physician for modern Ss) hi tric h 71s t t, ; excellent; Young man, 
semen, good working conditions. Apply|Men, service our prod local indust con ; a on psychiatric hospital; |Shipping dept asst. dress exp; excellent) Young 54 E llth. |SECY-BKKPR, reliable, efficient, young, 7} one year radio engineering study; PerM|cooking SC 4-9090 as 
Machinery and Tools 


usekeeper herry’s, 300 Park Av “|cerns, perm. Canteen Co, 314 E 23 St non-licensed acceptable. X2592 Times oppty: $30. Babs Jr, 498 7 Av dept Bonita Brassiere Co, , F | tt Ss ss 
Ho puseman, —— | salary. Hotel Bretton Hali,| Men, full or evenings; steady work; good | Piano polisher, full-part time. Wurlitzer, Shipping clerk assistant, express, parcel Feoung 7. ie  esee.. woud ——— nk deateen temenaitie waite, We —- OCRCHASIRG oan 22 os ence nay ny lovely suburban home;; _ - 
86 St & Broadway jpay. Vanguard. 619 W_ 54th 120 W 42 St. NY post, packing _LE_2-8559 good pay. Matza (\ ‘ . other help; $75; advanct. MU_ 5-9040 PRINCIPALS only— rivate concern has 
Housemen. Apply Manager. Hotel Regent. IMen, full time — evenings; good pay: |esstare  Gramer. matcutter, paper backer,|Shipping clerk for “display tixts © line. Foune mean. inteligent good opportunity, "Saaiie” caters, ctmates women. a By t cy at, Mother's helper; sleep in; Mt Vernon: zal for sale wit! = qu nt 
Broadway & 104 St, N Y C steady. Farel Destin, 619 W ‘54th jgood sal. AS 4-0199. Write K184 Times. |S. & S. Display, 1010 6 Av. textiles. _ 4% Stoo exe fe $60. V 513 TI “4 ed, B. mart, Out Vernon Tiel, reverse ge, #3 Becker-s , 
7 . ' — | > —— = : lerk; good salary; good|®*c Or profes person > mes./RADIO, university trained, B. S. math.,|— - : ; : % Canedy-Otto Ri sage 
Housemen. good salary. Apply Housekeep- lmonate see no exp; $24 start. Bruley 4 Si ie ns eek. yoane, expd, axon ‘oppty — pny KO Supply, 301 "W 40.|SECRETARY, experienced first-rate exee-| industrial and lab exp, development. 0387 usse,, setined, Sanetmgents ender 60; SiGs)s ot S tm ‘ 
er. Hotel Nava 112 Central Park South.|Novelty, 299 Wallabout St, Bklyn reps i ymette Dress, 501 7 Av textile Newcastle Fabrics, 105 W_  40th.joppty cE. tenet utive; research, editorial work; person- Times monthly. _Cal}_ LO _7-6739 rt cullen + 
. > P coe , : n con- . —~ = " en tad , 0 on 
Howseman, food pay: No Sundays. Mote| Men. cir work: no_exp. Mise McAndrews,|?i14 man. Depot Plaza Pimeria, 32 Depoi|Shormaber. exp Army shee rep: $65 sallFoune man. oftie werk: AruShInE Ur [aie. col grad) $66" week. VSM Times. |RADIO. veteran wants. poallon repaling,| wre» or 12 months. girl 34 ya SIS) 510s oasi 
effe 8 W 56 St j white wer, 317 Washington St. Bk lyn. | 24 “ guar Surplus Co, Front, Newburgh, ? : - ~|SECRETARY, expert stenographer-corre-| testing or servicing, O470 Times = a = 1 HP " 
Nurse, reliable, help cook; good pay. Mrs.)) 35 isp hing 


Housemen, good hours; pleasant condilions |Men. learn plastic molding: 60-hour week | Placement clerk, know! rest'’rt, hotel oper;|Sign Painter, comm'l, Ist class, stdy work,|) Young man, woman, Cy i, ‘oun spondent; diversified executive experience: |REAL estate management agent, 15 years’ Nurse, reliable, hel 
i y Housekeeper, Kenmore Hall, 145 E 23.|Insulati : ee 10 
» 


Apply H : Hal tion Mfg Co, 11 New York Av, Bkiyn, | ©*C®!! OPE Majestic Agency, 89 E 10th.junion. Wire Isadore Posner, Tucson, Ariz.| to 10 P M Vetter : ty int telligent. capable: $42-$45. V544_ Times.| exp apartments, commercial. mainte-/. , ‘ 
Houseman, vacuum; good salary perma-| Men learn window eaten $40 wk paid) Plater, gold & silver, many yrs’ exp, nov-|Silk Screen runners and helpers; steady!|Young men, 17, over; gd sal; gd ope ¥ SECRETARY, 8 years’ experience; Grand|nance, trouble shooter; auto. 0264 Times Nurse, 2 children; own room; other help; |; cr allenge 36x72 pre 








tel Paramount. 235 W 46 St hile learning. Rm 35, 200 W 72 St. jaity jewelry: gd pay. Rm 518. 106 Fulton./Good pay! Pargament, 307 Canal St perm job; 40 hrs 6th fl, 250 W Sith. Central area: 5 days, $40: smail office|SALESMAN, EXTENSIVE, DIVERSIFIED $150 Cedarhurst’ 0963 h ~ 


ndustrial engineer, time study St. —- lilfen. light shop work; steady; 54 hours. Plumber, jobbing work; steady; good pay.|Slippers, exp fitting rm foreman, high-| Young men, general shipping work; g£004)preferred. MU 4-0909. Apt 602 _| exp, aggressive, efficient organizer, ma-| Nurse; perm; expd; 3-months baby; high)1 Challenge 48x48 
ntrois. Box 734. 1474 Bway 1123 W 64th, 7th f |}Youthnow & Mankovitz, 215 W_145 St |grade footw:. La Marquise, 137 Varick St.jsalary; oppty Millbrook, 625 Bway. _ SECRETARY, 9 years’ diversified business|ture judgment: executive. V410 Times sal. Call any morning, SC 4-8981 __| plate. 295 Je »7 us 
| Plumber, jobbing exp; steady employment.|Soda-sandwich working manager; good pay.|Young men, assist shipping; 40 hrs, 542| exp: capable ‘Girl Friday’ for busy ex-|SALESMAN, experienced, retail  work|Nurse, part time mornings; care infant |GISHOLT 7k. 1943 machine 
M334 Times Revion, 619 W 54th. WMC rules observed |1423_Amsterdam Av, near 130 St iEliman's, 872 Flatbush Av, Bklyn days, good sal. Ellay, 229 4 Av ecutive; 5-day wk. V541 Times clothes. O476 Times for business mother. RH 4-0257 | spindle, chucking ma 


: Gitineniondl 
ab oper, single, 48 hrs, $200: perm;|Men. good pay experience unnecessary 
operators, expd. Todd represent-\Men, war work; good pay. American Cyan-|Plumber’s helper; exp unnec; good pay.|Seda men, full-part time, no experience.| Young men, law office, : 


errands, genl use-|SECRETARY, speed stenographer, corre-|SALESMAN#®, veteran, seeks post-war con-| Nurse. Well behaved boy 3, girl 7 months.|ner & Sware 
ES. 8 River St. Hoboken. N J.|@mid repr. USES, 87 Madison Av (28 St).|C4ll morn, 956 Intervale Av, Bx. DA 9-1907 |Whelan Drugs, 165 W 46th (Room 311) ful. exp unnec: own handwrit. K190 Times spondent, shrewd, dependable; $45; mid- nection. O207 Times Higgins, 10 Locust Av. Larchmont 2-0890 " 


. | , | , town DE 2-7227 7 Nurse, white, 2 children rt-full tim 
spector lofting exp on aircraft design.|Men, earn extra money evenings as soda|Pocketbook maker, experienced  better/Soda man, all-around exp, nights; gd pay,| Young men, white, wed, for store work; SALESMAN, young man, interested in good | Nurse, . ren, pe 7 e 
111 St. College Pt, L I ela pensers. Loft's, 251 Wy 12d a ” “|r sandbags. Apply 17 F 37 St. Room 507 tips. Windsor Chemists, 1419 6 Av (58th) .|$30 to start. Chock Full O'Nuts, 250 W_™4. | SECRETARY. Is there interesting position opportunity. O95 Times own room, AT 9-4251. before 10 A M 


ingpector-toolrm; good pay, ov'time; mid-|Men, boys, learn composition trade; $24 | Polishers learn hi-grade watch case polish-|Solderer, expd costume jewelry; steady|Young men, light packing, stock work; 5). for expd A-l steno? AP 4 0480 — SALESMAN secks side line for better haber- Nursemaid, care 10-month boy; good sal 

tt Ma Shor > th |start. 5 days. 508 W 26th. 4th fl ng; steady, overtime. Rm 703, 62 W 47th.|work. Bijou Novelty, 65 W 37th days, $25. 498 7 Av, 34 floor fh mg on te SATS; SPEEDY.) dashers and men’s depts. 0490 Times ary, permanent. HA 6-3801 - Bway 
Inspector, plece part: high waces. overtime.| Men, 17-50, $37.85 start, 48 hours. 1 \Polisher, Japper, steady 64 W 48 St,/Sprayer. expd on wood novelties. Royal|Young men over 16, deliver telegrams. RELIABLE 261 TIMES SALESMAN seeking line, side-line, prefer-|Nursemaid, exp; under 40; schoolboy 5 a ——-_ 
Briam Mfg 48th Av, L 1 C. factory work, adv. Bklyn, MAin 4-6867,— |Room 302. Phil ‘Goldenberg Plastics Co, 49 Bleecker St Western Union, 160 W Bway, Room M-5.|SECY, stenotype typ, expd, ed Miterary per-| ably comm; immediate reply. 0413 Times. |s000 salary. RH 4-1800, Apt 1904 ancane -— hines no er ‘ 


Inspectors, tools; gd sal, bonus & overtime.|Men, rec, ship dept clks; sal open: whole.| Polishers & platers, exp costume jewelry; |Sprayer, expd wood finisher. L. Wesely &|Veterans, under 28, travel Calif-return;| son; 5-4; $40 st; essential, O276 Times SALESMAN, textiles, city. cutting-up|Nursemaid, care business woman's 2 chil ~ i: B 
Fao A aft, 13-10 111 St, ¢ 


10 111 llege Pt, L 1.|Sale hdwredgenl merch. ‘Spiegel, 806 Bway.|8000 wages. F. & W. Plating, 515 E 14th./Co, Inc, 312 E 95 St circulation: commission. 1776 Bway (503) |SECRETARY, educ'l bekgrd, expd, compe-| trade; also inside. 0265 Times dren; $100 mo; sleep in pref. EN 2-2968 , ; : 
Inveatory clk, fam retail & cost inv, ledg|Men in movie display plant; $29.91, 40-hr|Polishers, expd electronic work: day &/Sprayr, 5-d wk; gd py:apply 9-12, Mr. Man-| Veterans, mechanics; permanent position.|tent assume responsibility, $40. 0267 Times. |aijjppING-receiving clerk-head; many yrs|Nursemaid, 2 boys; own room; high sal-|Q C. Kings 

k acc't tate sal. CY669 Times week. Mr. Wilson, 525 W 43 St night; modern plant. Klump, 305 E 46th. ley eran & Co, 1000 Dean St, Bklyn.| Baer Brothers, Canal St, Stamford, Conn./SECRETARY for tax consultant, complete] warehouse exper; take complete charge.|@ty; ref; Cedarhurst 0255 collect llantic Av, Bklyt 
good pay.|Veteran, by insurance broker; knowledge} knowledge of all taxes. V518 Times. |Box 621 T, 217 7_Av Nursemaid, experienced; references; girl, BOILER, 250 H 6 = ibs 





Investigators, 23 ; outside; exp unnec;|Men, 18-45; start $31, $38-$53 after 4 mos.| Porters, clean banks, bidgs, hotels; steady,| Sprayer on waste paper baskets; — : : 4 . 
trave "1, 250 W 57t |nexp National Biscuit, 445 W 15th °P'|gd_sal. National Cleaning, 9 W 29th M. Stanley “Jones. 451 Bway fire insurance. V1028 Times Downtown. _|SECY-STENO, college; 6 yrs exp; perm; SHIPPING CLERK (HEAD) 3; good salary. Call before 1. SC 4-6084.| Chambersburg } ¢ Har 


t perm th Fil, 2 W 7th 

——— ; ; r 5-day; $35. WI 5-3765 Well erienced; Al refs. O290 Times Nursemaid; child 20 mos; gd home-sal;| versal truck an 
Investigator. young man, preferabl |Men, day-night work. Apply Housekeeper, | Porter, residence club; sober; $30 wkly;/¢ ineer, licensed, Stahl-Meyer, Veterans, $125 mo, learning airplane mech. )- 3765 =. exp - & ‘sal 

betel as Call Roon 718, ob Ww: ith. |St Moritz, 55 W 58 St cured Per! steady. 222 Riverside Dr (cor 94th gy! engin >= Academy Aeronautics, La Guardia Field STENO-SECY, 2 ie exp; intelligent,| SUPERMAN» is bigger than I in size but/other help. Call between 12-3. SC 4-5849 | Buffalo Spr 


; ‘ J : " uw ion Steam Crane 
Envesticators, inourance —y nati ce: Men, helpers, various depis, exp wnnec,|Porter, service elevator, days, apt house,|Sieamfitter supervr, indust’l contractor,|Experienced painter mE hospital; good sal-| capable: 5 days, $32-$35; midtown pre not in ideas, yng reli, intel vet seeks pos|Nursemaid, 6 mo baby, Igt = igt ldry; aie 17 E 5t 
00d fay: amex over 45. Siar "Ties jcom, ind. Cardwell, 81 Prospect St. Bklyn'|$125_month. Cid 2-8033 layout, estimtg. State quali. X2753 Times.|ary for right person 2549 Times 40 |SECY: V531_Times neateical #ap: a sense; pub rel, adver, sell; $40./steady: 6 days entry; $125. X2546 Times HARTFORD = re 
Sanitor, —— a ee = 7 time: no exp: downtown|Porter, no exp req for neat and willing ee ge ag age install “Gomes. |Desirable positions Fo parts; oppty;. s -stenographer, 5 yrs’ theatrical exp; imes. Nersemaid. experienced, —-— ge boy | matic eutetf, elect rd 
‘ E 6-7488 jdept store. 77 Nassau St, N Y. M. Reid.|Worker. Huyler’s, 863 Bway (17th), NYC.|tic plants: contract basis. AP 7-7300 hrs. B., Mc. & B., 1221 Bedford Av, ikiyn. ection, tee ie was aa inter- TEACHES. costal coer ceo ‘military, |3 rE other pe ah wakes EN 2 5395 soa = $ 
Jeweler, " Stdy; excell position; gd worker; \Men, steady, factory; 40 firs + overtime; |Porters, 9:30 PM-6:30 AM; cleaning; $30|<ienographer-bookkeeper, young, immedi- — ; tak cae pues eV 5 Sy Fog Selon ~ - 
t jewelry. Rm 1004, 22 W 48 St |60c hr. 11 W 19th, 10th floor wk: apply aft 8 AM Mr. Wittstock. 4 W 48|ately. post-war position. 2745. Times ___Instruction—Male_ STEND., typist, expert, personable, capable| VETERAN #, 25. college, desires position in|salary and home. NE_9-8976 , 
| 4 detail, figures; $38-$40. FO 4-0546 Mexico or South America; preferably !M-|Nursemaid, full-part time; sleep in-out;| ath 


Jewcler-silversmith, novelty jewelry, expd; | Men, part time, stock work, any 4 hrs or|Porters, day and night, no experience nec-|<tock & shipping clark, 5 days, 40-hour General STENO, secy., expert; engineering, com-|port, export. O253 Times 7 mos’ baby: excel sal. JE 7-9789 a, er) 
4 _ : DNO, * H . : - & JE 7-97 MOTOR, G , 1200 rpm 
0 volts, si ng W Z 











eral sma 


‘ ertime W 42d. Rm 1547 more, 7 AM to 12 PM. 166 W 35th, Macy’s.|@Ssary._ Arnold Constable, 5 Av & 40 St.Jweek; $26. MU 2-5050 “NY S@HOOL Mechanical Dentistry ETER : ppor: 

; - ~ . - > = = ) § _, reial, literary exp; $40. KI 3-0318 VETERAN«, 19. experienced, seeks oppor-| Ww “ 
Jewelers & jewl repair men; union mem-|Men. full-part time, no experience needed.| Corer, Nish class apt bidg; $107 monthly.| stock men and packers, permanent posi-| ESSENTIAL for war and peace. FREE/STENG, part time, capable office ma-| tunity connected with dramatic field— thas, parents’ sere’ BU 5.9022, 9-5, wh aays.|w 22 ot 
bers only (St Louis concern). DC673 Times. | Whelan. Drug, 700 8 Av (44th a tions; good oppty. Joseill Suits, 512 7 AY.) Book B, 125 W_ 3ist. Tel CH 4-3994 chines; $1 per hour. FO 7-8495 stage. screen, radio. V524 Times Women, 50 yrs, refined; kitch or waitress, lGould Sump pump. Keat 


Jeweler & polisher, sterling silver. Paul|Men, past 45, post-war jobs! $24-$26 start; |Porters, 5-day week. Saks Fifth Ave)Stock helpers & porters; 5-day plus Over-|\jQTION-PICTURE operating taught in-|STENOGRAPHER, full or part time, com-|VETERAN«, — ~ photographic experience|tearoom: part time, 4-9. 47 W Sist. lst fl |Adams St. Newa 

Fremont, In 38 Prince St jrouting dept. 505 8 Av (8th floor — ' time. Apply Mr. Dempsey, 15 fl. 11 E 26th.|” qividually. Brown’s, 1125 6 Av (43d) petent, personable, school. MU_6-4268.| and background. O92 Times - Woma lored; light h k oak lr i AN i h : hand i) 
Jeweler on gold cast rings; special orders.|Men, train service; write only. H & M Forters, waite, Gays, office building; 46/ Stock & receiving clerks; radio war plant;|~  y Institute Photograph Profitable YOUNG lady, 28, college, business and) WINDOW trimmer, expd R T W, available ea ~ | + ry aan vim ‘A — a i — i LOG! - rrr: 7 ae eS 
goed pay. Room 1508. 62 W 47t) |R R, Rm 113 E, 30 Church, N Y: ref reqd “ = 32.48 wk. Supt, 33 W 424. day work. 510 6 Av, Sth floor opportunities, 10 W_ 33d Book : social exp, ability to write, seeks inter-| 2 days weekly, X2703 Times f:_6° 5 e _ —— . Pe a tlor TR 8 Mf 40 Jerome 
Jewelers, polisher, better class work.|Men, light defense work; must have ferns rood oery: 8:30 to 5:15 P M.iStock & delivery boys; post-war opoty: Rad C nications esting, stimulating position. DL66 Times YOUNG man, def, coll trained, person- gy = sg wg sleep out; $125 ’ ndition ai ot . ‘ ’ 
Kronberg-Hollander, 71 W 45. BR 9-5406.|!ease. Luminous Safety Prod, 168 W_ 23d pomne ley,_ 305 E 45th, Miss Fine, 6th fl./eq sal advtc. Barricini, 22-19 41 Av, LIC eee ee wrecks TT, YOUNG lady desires selling position, furni-| able, enterprising, desires pos with re- pee : : JOsmoRN. SEXTON lathe. motorized ae 
Jewelry engraver, experie need on cast gold| Men, for candy factory; good pay; steady Porter, high class apt bldg; good working | Stock men, full time; also 9:45-2 or 2- RADIO-TELEVISION E TRONICS ture showrm; capable, expd BE_5-1932 sponsibility and future V1038 Times Dntn.|¥oe woman, white or colored, house-wk, ~ a ——— 


of eS ar OO Se , ‘leor ot, 45 ’ Nor ) » f ly. _ 9 to 1, 5 or 6 days wk. Call LO 9-1517. |. SW! a ‘ : 
, 126 W 46 St, N Y C.\Apply store, 131 W 14ti nd. Supt, 45 Gramercy Park North (21).|ciosing. Hearns, 74 5 AV Day-Evening Sessions. Apply Dat COLLEGE N 21, knowled ' / ; : 

5 ~~ tial = i ™ , . ‘graduate, M A in ed psych; two|/ YOUNG MAN», Veteran, wiedge $100 a utom y ( ‘ Bleer x 
Jewelry model maker or assistant, expd on|Men (3), shipping dept, 50 yea Porter. high class apt bidg; $107 monthly.| Stock clerk, optical, exp unnec; 5 da; op- yg pon ec tyer ‘a PL, 3.4585 years’ teaching experience: desires inter-| typing: general office work preferred —- ened oo y — iy fe |UNIVERSAL truck crane, mounted og 
gold rings. Princess, 126 W 46tt jferred; steady. Plummer > 35th |; ee Supt, 425 West End Av. R pty for adv. Room 2106, 745 5th vA _ 480 Lexington Av ¢ 1) 4 esting position. O67 Times neat appearance, personality. ES 6-2861 — work; good pay. Crawfor¢ MN sl Wiig r ted 
Jewelry polisher foreman, gold rings; thor|Men, no exp; essential work. Wholesale a & bandyman. Apply Supt, 50 W) stock men or boys; no experience neces- Technical Trade COLLEGE evening student, English major,, YOUNG man, temporary until Christmas; 4 — eS fect itior Ew F elle "han 
caDabte arge dept. 9th fil, 126 W 46th St Typewriter Co, 155 6 Av > St sary. Stern Bros, 42 St-6 Avy DRAFTING, Mathematics, Architectural,| writing ability, industrious, seeks position| newspaper and advertising exp good ap-|+ ” ’ 7553 iT RRE _- gr oye 


; ~ - ; | i ' ; . ~ “ adv ’ » rr T 7512 ble houseworker, $150 month; si in; . 
Jeweler, expd on ladies gold cast rings,|Men, drivers, helpers, sorters, clks, ca Porters,_ high pay! Permane@ jobs! 6th Stock ciks, full or part time, publishers;| Mechanical, Electrical, Structural, Build-| with advancement. V538_ Times pearance; travel considered. V512 Times. |AbI e -4— WA 9 oant irret, motorized; good nd ale 


stead b Peerless Jewelry, 15 W 47th. |Washers. United Parcel, 331 E 38th *| floor __ 57-18 Northern Blvd, LIC (36 St).jessential. Mr. Cassetta, 37. W 47. __ ling Estimating, Veterans Invited! Mondell|\COLLEGE grad, English, economics, seeks| YOUNG man, commercial stationery exp,|%004 home, 0661 
5. les ic| Porter “& fireman, $110 with room. 2090! stock clerk, $35 start. Original Brenner|institute, 230 W_4lst interesting position in ady., publishing} wants new connection with post-war op- Employment Agencies SEALED celnev austncs asiades, 22” ans 


Bewelers, capable, on gold and silver pro-| Men, apprentices, learn tool, die & plastic) * 0" : “ "> G-1R76 T 
duction X2692 Times lmold making: post-war oppty. CH 3-6963.| Walton _Av FO 4-9105 Bros, 60 Division St. N Y IDIESEL engines, vital now; post-war; in- firm ES 6-1876 portunities pref O89 Times i BABY NURSES GOVERNESSES) ne: chuck n ed denlacemen? 
TRAINED INFANTS’ NURSES 1 t Co oo ‘ ‘ 5 


Jeweler on gold cast rings; special orders. |Men, train for mgr out-of-town family | Porters, nights, office bldg; 46 hrs; $32.48./stock & receiving clerk, expd, married;| vestigate employment possib Hemphill YOUNG man, 25, single, wants responsible ® AINED : ' \ 
yparel store. Dejay, 114 E 23 St Apply Rm 1512, 1540 Bway midtown: $37. EL 5-6526 Schools, 31-14 Queens Bivd, L I City i position with future, learning a trade.|ARIT AGENCY, 200 W 72D. TR 4-0466./,4Q Screw Machine. Turret Lathes. 


an a oS 62 Ms st * Situations wanted ; 

weir. P , . § advertisements con- ‘Oe Time : - 

Jewelry polishers, expd, sterling silver; top|Men or strong boys for receiving dept of|Porters, part time, for men’s wear firm; |Stock & shipping clerk, steady, overtime.| PLASTICS, new group now forming N.¥ | coining the ane it) ate athe X260: Times. COOKS, chambermaids, houseworkers;| power stamping ss, a makes 4 
‘ ¢ W 46 St h fl | War plant Espey Mfg, 305 E 63d jhrs between 9 AM-6 PM. Rm 50, 542 5 Av iT Miller & Son. 874 Broadway Technical Institute, 108 5 Av |. ow on servige 6m one women ed | ¥Ou G MAN ®&, college education, veteran, part-full time: excellent positions Lynn gre Nationa 128 Mott St. CA 6-247 


|Men, young, learn Silk Screen trade; Obc\|Porter, ptg plant; steady. Steidinger Press,|Stock & shipping clerks: 5% days. Ham-|LINOTYPE—Call this evening Empire), ]_,asst office manager, sales, able, asst;|Agency, 2067 Bway, near 72d /BENCH LATHES, SOLTH BEND » 


Capital Poster. 307 Canal St, NY. |34 Hubert St, WA_5-9750 mel Riglander & Co, 395 4 Av (28th) School, 206 E 19th. GR 5-5733 $50 wk. V526_ Times 7 — Household Situations Wanted-Female) “ob. CANAL MA 176 LA 
esires D o 


Men-citizens!! Essential industry. Bonus- |Porter, relief, days; $27.92 per wk. Ap-|Storeroom man for hotel. Apply Km 124, Sales Help a Executive Positions Wanted—Male pn gt Times "\GOMPANION nurse. licensed, lady; no|$!,800 FOR 6 gasoline welding machines: 
% ag , good busl-| housework, $150 up; own room, bat! t x 








Jewelers, setters on marcasites; polishers; 
good litior Dale Carol, 31 E 27tt } 
Sic builders machinists, plenty overtime x 
t. 63-44 Austin St. Rego Park. L 1. |Pleas_surroundings. Muzak Corp, 250 W_54 | ply 925 Park AV Vanderbilt Hotel, Park Av-33d le ; $35, us comm.| ACCOUNTANT - NDABLE yo a raller mounted <2439 me 
Junior accountant: CPA office: state age,/Men, receiving and shipping ladies’ ap-|Porters, office, bide: steady work. Apply|stutfer. experienced om fr, aniimalsi op-|C0sUitin, "ay. Bly. BU 2-198 ea pele, eatcliekt tet Ontelonee ero avetiasle Mon thru Pri, #-5;|RE_4-0009, 11:2 FUMBLER (wet) 24° barrel AF, 
e@ucation, salary and exp K81 Times parel. Darling Stores, 370 7 \ Supt, 55 W_ 42 § rs sas ‘ eee portunity for right man O 5-456 ov 7 Ti ‘ , “ L . . ant : ’ '| COMPANION 7 ie to lady,| Ww ng 7>wsOs a7 
. = ——— - > - — 5 Ca | : imes refs; Jewish. X2636 Times pall N, nursing experience, acy - 
ne Men-k < Z : =P. I ; j > : cs Collector-sisman, car, ilcentod’ gen mere “ }. t a . ron Times ; . ee 
Ju ier piraftsman. sroeee, sua, Coeenee er eon a t assembly: cova, way oyer Porter, yy  ¥ more. Mee a, 70 families; good pay. Cl sal & comm. Star, 106 Market, Newark BUYER housewares, gifts; successful mer-|REST manager or hotel, — steward, Coan: 50 week me. 2641 _Time lave steam a . 7 . = “see 
’ ngine g. 1 bush Vv - : Oe is oa = : — — i- : , aia — — as - } “ker » , - ousekeeper,? to semi-invali *) . : 
i . i =P. ; : “ , ide: ™ Dental Detail Representative, traveling,| chandising background; fine personality;:| Amer, diversified exp; excel ref; go any- - Bn . 4 — . 
Lauer ee, — go — Bindery, days (eI ar ge Apply. Supt, 90: gg a eg FO tatters salary, expenses. X2750 Times for better type store, wholesaler X2732|)where. O544 Times nox best peterenes ad ae 022 Me ae Bi ey? and jroner: | exhaus® 
it rs ee washingwoo Av, _= pas_& ie ; “ ; y ‘| Time coo trian, rly; ti yuse work, | : ea - 
|Men, boys to run errands, dental labora-|Porter, candy factory; good pay, steady.|Supi, fine modern elevator house; oppty;|Freight solicitor, expd, RF ft wie a, SUE "better dept store: tant 12 Tutors and Private Instruction 4 afte t.. ° & NE % pr iia) Office Furniture—Store Fixtures 
jtory; full-part time. 1501 Bway, Rm 1519.|Mr. Vilendrer, 116 W 32d (15th fl) good sal, tips. Rm 1702, 18 E 41 St terr; sal; history confidentia >W25 ag ee A 7 Cope store; lau 3% —~ 


. - “| years in art needles, pictures, mirrors.| TUTORING, evenings or Saturdays; high) @OOK, exp, Christian, Florida season , — . . 
|Men, 2:30 to midnight, Saturdays : Porter, East Side club, pleasant surround-|Supt, expd mechanic; 65-family, elev; $15;|Purniture Snseeman, pe wens Chet gifts, lamps, draperies 2102 Times school and junior college subjects: certi-| Eilers, 47 E 81 St, city. Phone RH 4-951) ALWAYS A BARGAIN 
SL 6-5287 knowl antiques nec: & 4 : ENGINEER. exec, mech, expd energ meih.|{¢4, man teacher, 9-5 CI 7-5218, Mr.laoyER) Ui-Campanion, educated, sports NEW AND USED 
Sabervers chemical plants l hr N ¥. See|Men, stock dept, $29 wkly; 40-hr wk, time/ Porter, route work; $30; 5 days. 101 W/Supt, col, 1225 Boston Rd, 25-fam; see Vurusare sareemes, Ca il vst Astoria. “ods, draft practices, materiel control,) Bradford children 4 yrs up; own room; ref. LA 4 STEEL LOCKE RS 
r r USES, 87 Madison Av (28 St).| half for overtime. 337 W_27 St 2 St, Room 205 bldg. Apply Agent, 318 E Kingsbridge Rd.|Henshaw Furn y specs, know design. purch. 0385 Times.|LADIES’ Portuguese classes, 18 hours, $12./7300 xt 208. O88 Times STEEL TABULATING TI 5 
y ATING 


; = > > i j : " i nec- | __ . a - ; 
Laborers. See Western Electric rep, USES,| |Men, ex-service, to pack; 5-day, 40 hrs;|Porter, 12 midnight-8:30 A M, in photo-|Supt for apt house. Apply Arleigh office,|Hearing ald salesman, no ape rans EXECUTIVE plant manager, 34, produc-|—0fessora Gomez, SC 4-4079.___ | iqiceKeEPER, nurse, refined, young; DESKS. < 


87 Madison Av (28 St), daily to Sc hr. 31 W 27th, 3d floor.  _—_— {engraving shop. Horan, 44 W 28th, 3d fl. |99-19 21 Av, Astoria. RA 8-4311 essary; $35 weekly plus com ience? salary|,,(/0%:,industrial-labor relations: resource- Household Help Wanted—Male refs: live out. 739 Times, 2689 Bway KARDEXES. STO! 
Good Men, factory work, 79c hr, steady, plenty|Porter-handyman, handbag factory; good|Supt, white, couple, handyman, steam, >|\Jewelry salesman, retail experie ful administrator; seeking wider scope. Buller. valet, high type, expd, drive, abil-| HOUSEKEEPER-cook, references, $40 week- TIME CLOCKS 


Lathe, milling, bench hands. Ovt. > , ~ > “ p “ T " — 
; 9 John St, Bklyn jovertime. 20 Van Dam St, City, 10th fl. |Salary: 40 hrs. Carlin-Fried. 12 W 21st. |rooms, $100. LE 4-4349 $100; write details. 1420 Times Fordham.|nog4 ‘Times. ity. Mr. Weston, LE 2-7309, after 10 ly. Box W, 1272 Lexington Av URES 


~ — ; ; = aa me aN teed sal &lpxrcur ¥ ——— om ton. LE 2 ; 

Lathe s ss. =\Men, no exp; various positions; full-part| Porters, day and night cleaning; $35 up./s intendent, white-colored, 31 families; |Life ins agency position, oe as | &|EXECUTIVE%, young college graduate, ac- ——e SE : d girl, , 

t Deign C + — 5 _ —_ fc & Flee | tim e Schrafft s, 56 W x 23d : 4 ;103 Park Av (cor 41st), Room 317 5 fms. electric. $75 mo. TR 2-4015 comm, _€x¢ el_future. Room 411, 23 se Seay counting background; experience buying, a. a ame iw gop gc Se leun- OFFICE FUR } ITURE 

Lathe operator, engine . oT \Men, dignified messengers, $20, 40 hours.|Porter, apartment house; $107 month, (Superintendent. hotel; a pay, living|Millinery salesmen, better hats; salary,|selling, management, wholesale or manu-|?0S aes; “TF dry; adult small family. MO 2-5884 1s80 Bway (nr I qe WO 44768, 

Card Prospect St. Bklyn. [1 E 42d, Room 307 onion '|foom._Mr._Jerram, 153 _W_188th jquarters. Capitol Hall, 166 W 87th (Bway) .|commission. _15606_ Times Se a pag gg OY 5314. |HOUSEVORKER, exp, reliable, part time,| OP IMME! [ATE SALE 

Lathe hands; steady; good pay; 18 hrs; |Men, light deliveries; good hours, 5 days.|Porter, general work, sportswear house.|Tailors, women’s apparel, 5-day, 40 hrs. reer salegmen, Connon ge My ~~ mfrs ee oer ties bus man recovering stroke;|_4{ternoons; references. ED _ 4-3804 Iw ry 4 off + pers t 

ovtime. Amsterdam Instrument. 227 W 64.|August Neuse & Co, 43 E 125 St Ambassador Co, 1372 Bway. _ ________ | Loeser’s, 252 Livingston St, Bklyn. Deima Nee sey .jsales of eS; vailabl tificat Xlage. qualifications X2695 Times HOUSEWORKER, colored, 5 days, morn-|“**¥ #°¢_ usec § 4 Se, aoa 
af . - >» as ‘ i : | Porters, t A ce. 86 7 er. Englis : Radio parts men (3), Bklyn-Bx-Jersey.|sales; references; available certificate. g q - ) 2-3799 | STEEL L or KERS 

: ‘ “ - —_— ee ee eel vere Ly hy ee mer a wnat oprty ye pe gS as adult, beginner; part Leading lines Drawing. comm. K130 Times.|2757 Times Poultryman, for private ‘estate, $90 month- ings, 8-1; $18.50 week MO 2-: - 


é 





Junior clerk messenger, exc position; 
: y ek Room 2016, 2 Park Ave 
Kitchen help, pegm, good pay Hotels Brit- 
t ¥ ackstone and others 2354 7 AV 
Laberatory assistant chanlstry oppty; 7 
Heine ‘8 47 Rd LIC ' days: $6 day, meals. Regal Candy, 27 ings. Housekeeper, 47 E 62d 3-rm front: have help 


14 
« 

















Y - - I EXECU a : i, =r X2290 Times HOUSEWORKER, part time, 5 mornings.| Safes. Desks, Chairs 
Lathe hands, ist & 2d class: overtime.|Men, for pipe shop. Ace Iron & Pipe Co,|Porter, fireman; steady position; also ma-|Teghnical writer, , electro-mechanical Cortes. AG . *est firm; gd comm;|EXECUTIVE editor: films, books, maga-|ly, room. board. 3 Box 50, 1152 3 A\ Fi Filing Cabinets. Stora 
& S Precision, 38-11 31 St. LIC 161 Cook St, Bklyn chinist. 430 E 107 St Originate all copy. Mexsen, 460 W_ 34th. jclie OY sense; attractive personality, 0491 Times.|—— —— |HOUSEWORKER, refined. 5 mornings. t Cabine ‘ 
Lathe operators, good op ee ost-|Men, delivery helpers; chauffeur: 3 license|Porters, $30.68 start. Adams Laboratories,|Telecraph messengers, full-part time.|Route Salesman, sal & comm; 5d; cash sec. LATIN AMERIC re t. — ye COUPLE, cook, butler-chauffeur $15.50: downtown. Murray. 227 W 116th aT PRIC ES Hi. RD TO. BEA? 
: Tool Co, 1s4 Grand St. jessential: 5-day wk. NY Linen, 326 E 324.|525_W_ 52d "Western Union, 422 E 149th, gar 3 Av.|Cashman Laundry, Gerard Av-E 140, Bx <oeuteen, Waar was a ‘capert aavieer _ Two in family, $300. 200 E 724.|LADY (English), would like care of child, CHAS. LEVIN & SON 
i. eo toolroom exp; perm; post-war|Men, attendants, L I sanitarium; $70 mo, | Porter, day work; good pay. Apply after|Timekeeper, nights; steady and ;|Shoe salesman, jcxperienced only, anetter wt gh ~~ a MODERN AGENCY afternoons, evenings. V539 Times “a en ame . ee ee 
oppty. Noma Electric, 55 W_ 13th room-board. 67 W 44th. Room 1006 12, 34th St Theatre, 160 E 34 St must have refs. X2575 Times ___ }shoes._Irving’s,_2152_White T’sbs _*\—-|MANAGER, chain, dept store experience, ~ Household Help Wanted—Couples NURSE. lady, highly recommended; exeel-|— * wey es a 
Laundry help, steady work; good condi-|Messengers, light deliveries; $20 weekly,|Porters. day or night; no experience.|Timekeeper-personnel work; excellent sal;|Shoe salesman, expd, retail; steady. Hau- merchandising, advertising, personnel, all Cour le for compact 6-room penthouse with} lent infant’s nurse. Phone Wednesday,/| NEW AND USED DESKS 
tions. N Y Polyclinic Hosp, 345 W 50th. jovertime. 128 E 44th (1 flight Apply 5-8 PM. Schrafft’s, 1381 Bway war work, post-war future. X2742 Times.|ser, 1143 Liberty Av, Bklyn. __ lines, capble handing volume. O71 Times. ults: must have references. CI 7-4121.)between 9-1, BU 8-2095. Chairs, tables les and bookcases 


N 





t man, 
wating. ¢ K. Clisby, 133 W_ 72d zine; heavy organizatnl exp; keen story Employment Agencies 





uM work. A 





( WO 4-& 
= 








28 


, one : : a family shoe; suburb ; trained, ¢ to bt t 
Laundry “help utility men. Park Central|Messengers, 16 or over, full-part time. |Porter (days), $30 weekly. Apply Supt, 18|Timekeepers in shipyards, Bklyn, Hoboken; Shoe salesmen, expd, MANAGER, .37, 17 years’ exper natl 5c, ae les-men-women, house parents; West-|NURSE, , practical, hospital trained, take| prices har = nme 
; St-7 Ay RCA Communications. 66 Broad St E 48 St ta exp _unnec; state age, salary. X 2436 Times. Washington. D C; high salary. CH 4- ait 10¢ store ‘chain, desires —— ae out = institution. P __X2553_ Times baby from hospital. charge children, | CL: ARK & GIBBY INC. 
Laundry ‘manager, hosp Sp exp | necess; gd sal.|Messengers, bright, $25 week; light work.|Porter, steady work, pleasant surroundings.|Time study engrs, rate setter (NJ). Apply|Shoe saleemen expd: sal-comm; P M's. city. O75 Times Saae le, —exper, cook, butler for Long Is-|business couple; references. NE_8-7348 ors cae 
Jewish Memorial Hospital, Bway at 196 St.)X2617 Times. BES Paramount Cosmetics, 2 W_ 47th to 6 PM, 1 Audubon Av, cor store, W 165th./A._S. Beck, 25 W 43d, 6th fl MANUFACTURING engr, all phases man-|land: other help. Call after 11, SC 4-7269.)NURSE, refined, wishes position 1-2 chil- Ri = am 
Laxe ut man exp on heet metal work, cabi-|Messenger, 5 days; good salary; light|Pwrpress brake hands, exp setting gauges;|Time study engrs, rate setter (NJ). Apply Shoe and slipper coleeman, set pars Jersey! agemt mfg, design, methds, prod, contr,/Couple, cook-houseman; Conn; 2 adults;| dren, Florida winter. O64 Times NEW & US SED. D ES KS 
ne etc. Par Met 49 St-No Blvd, LIC.}work; perm. LE 2-8555 ee nights. Bridge Metal, 201 Front St.jto 6 PM, 1 Audubon Av, cor store,W 165th jretailers: expd one a 4 4 a interchble pris & mach tools. X2649 Times perm. Morns, EN _2-3321, Apt 211. _|NURSE, l-year-old child. Central Park} WIDE SELECT! 
Lead burner foreman. chemical plant, ex-| Messenger boys, ex: “el opportunity. The Pull-Wress feeders, cyl, day and night; 40 hrs.|Tire mounter. 348 Amsterdam Av (at|Sales clerks; good pay: Permanent: sm PHARMACIST, 29, experienced drug, al- E. SA _2-5899 : AND COMMERCIAI 
perien M639 Times man Co: Rm 2612, G Central Term, NYC.|Room 504, 75 Varick St (near Canal 77th) CPR LE he TE <2 Fruiterers, 788 Flatbush Av, Bklyn._ Hed sales promotion, copywriting, detail, Household. Help Wanted—Female _INURSE (trained), visiting, $1.50, then $1/EXCHANGES IMME 
Messenger-stk clk, 5 da, good sal Person-| Presser, machine, cleaning store. Berkshaw| Toolmakers, mach, Ist cl; top rates, ov't.|Salesmen, ‘premium mag offer, excel COMM.|nosition requiring ‘know-how’ and ef-|Ch’maid- waitress, white, expd; ref; o hourly. CH 2-7668 aS i ENNIS. 676 3 
gd pa c Les |Cleaners, 706 Pelham Pkwy. TA 9-911. |Zeno Prod, 42-26 28 St, LIC. (Queens Pl)./1440 Bway (1170), 9-10:30. Mr. Blum ficiency. 0400 Times family; sleep in: gd sal. 888 Park. Apt NURSE, kind, devoted, adore ines |, STEEL SSS 
Leather goods, — wallet mechanics; gd|Mill man for band resaw, retail lumber|Pressman, asst, on Verticals: high salary.| Tool designers, draftsmen, ME & E engrs;|Salesman, men’s furnishings, expd; ©°|pLANT mgr or asst to exec, exp ind &|Chambermaid- waitress, , expd woman: “small|” desire wintering Florida. O87 Times om _ , 4 £ “are~ 
salary. Mfr'd Specialties, 67 Lexington yard Newark: 40-hr time 44. X2611 Times.|Circle Press, 438 W 37 St. ME 3-1144 post-war opportunities: Ohio. X2426 Times./evening H. King & Co, 643 Bway mgn eng, system, dsgn & adm; grad ME|family; ref; excellent sal. 812 Park Av, 5B. NURSE, care children by day, week, week-|<)--— 100 tab . 120% 
Leather goods, mfg, charge stockrm, kno'Milling machine opers, 2d class Edmos| Press hand (power), expd; Steady; perm|Tool and diemaker, Ist & 2d class exp; Salesman, kwi toolrm, prd war pits; | Penn & EE; 40, now in consit mgn eng adm Chambermaid-waitress, white, ref required.| end ‘X2687 Times se yD ox Gusts Si 

ers: excell sai: future. DE674 T Products, 13 Christopher Av, Bklyn |work, overt. EL 5-3133 } opportunity position TR_5-4633 ter; vit abrasive draw acct x278 Times. X2439 Times WI 2-0344. Es +i hall NURSE, English, practical, invalid-infant; p binet § Se 

— j ; > ; : . - ; > j ; 7 insi k; high sal and|PLANT o> production manager, 20 yrs’ exp.|Chambermaid-waitress, white; 2 in family.| -o . 1041 2 A St T r. 106 D es 
Linol ayer 1 $100 wk: ty | Millwrights, 2 assistant foremen, chemical) Presser, ~ady; good pay. Sheffield, 224|Tool designers, shop exp preferred; top|Salesmen, xp, inside wor . ; ; 1 + wi 4 - recommended $1 2 Av > § I 12 
rie me oo > 60 F atb 1s rn ae plant: expd. M640 Times |W 79th. EN 2-5523 : lrates. Seaboard Engineering Co, 1170 Bway. |comm. Quaker City Linoleum cod a tact nesing planningy’ available "528 ‘Times. 1396 _Park_Av_($2)_ Apt TH. A? ere NURSE, licensed psychiatric, hospital train-|AT NATHAN ‘S—Bacgains 

hes lp ~ i i ) t inked products, |C&sing a > — 5-|\Chambermaid-waitress, good home; sleep) , ~ private. city. O282 Times e od . 
Linot op a ore N olishe a tehcas | Pre < rrtical & Kelly, st -~fO|\ Toot and diemaker, veteran given pref.|/Salesmen, under 40, repea ; a , am ; ng, fin type rivat m new used sk a 
ae ee eee eee entire time, FW oth ath Ti |ire 00.” BBGt Times Brokign n” “lHoftmans Tool, 2726 Jackson, fT City. lestablished, $39 against comm. BA 7-2037|PURCHASING agent. 10 years’ exp elec-lin, refs, Bu 8-7209. 911 Park Av (6B). lapcweTARY-companion to Waveling wo-|safer, executive sti 
= — — : —- ; : - aK : ronics, year radio e s Vile i lady: hotel; slee i o- se. «6Miss Anniused Kardexes 2 
nots operato F < , : stes adie -\P , 2/3, 3 ie -|Tool & kers, expd. E.S.T. Preci-|Salesmen with shoe exp; salary & “comm. ro — — Companion, nurse, one lady; 3 P| man: good ref: 21 yrs of age Miss Ann | used ardex RBoug 

Linotype op rat r, nights, union. Criterion ee rg ae custom tal-/ Pressman Ww a wes a a oe lion, 105°Greene St. CA 60048 Robert's Shoe Repair, 120 Fulton St, NYC peat OM only wanted ms me in. AC 2-3510 (517) IT. Ladden, 875 Main St, Worcester, Mass.|Nathan’s. 546 Bway (S 
—— = - = = = - + nm ; — | a ; 4 i : 7,000-$12, : y dir) STUC OM manager, coordinator, 32./¢, ish-speaking, for partly| oWepisn- ; = i inde 
iinetype operator for job and publication,|Molder men. mach hands wdwke plant./Pressman, run B Kelly, Miller press; stdy,|Tool designers!! Top rates plus avertime.|Salesmer, $7,000 $12,000 cal enee’ Times full charge or assist: 12 yrs training — 3 ear, aeep in: klyn 0647 | imes e ey Se? oun ys a a - _ 


ve scale "H 3-361 Eckenroth. 901 E 5 St. AL 4-6400, Mr Male.|Lester Ruling. 22 Reade St (City Hall).|Boland & Boyce, 295 Bway, NY, Rm 1201.|sales; sal & comm ed serv 7 ) e : ‘ 
: — - = - “700 Cen-|Salesmen, vital educational serv; draw vs radio, mech pts, allied fields. V41l Times.|( os nouseworker, good pay; family 3; own try-city: excell refs. CI 7-5322 iitana 0 A 














Leather eds opr, ‘Campbell mch ; steady.| 
t K Leather Prod. CA 6-1059 Inel. Underwood-Elliott, 1 Park Av 





man i] id 


Citype operator (combination); nights; |Multilith pressman, high wages g00d|Pressman, feed, and set type, distribute,|Tool designers. Western Electric, € leads. 342 
, five days. O58 Times ‘full or part time. MU 6-1673 jtral Av, Kearny, N J. Apply daily to 5. jearned coms, leads. 342 office, plant administrator, correspond- ‘ alled 


. ; * | . 3 : 2 child; ousewor light coo r live y lipme 1g . 
Liquor clerk. busy store; good salar y; expd;|Nailers (2), 75e-85c hour Boxcraft Co,/Pressman’s assistant, Kelly B, vertical; gd) Toolmakers, ex stamping dies. C. D Salesmen, live leads, radio support; draw ence, sales, production, control; university oo mguseseopet. “k {ak ‘¢c H ‘ . - a 8 _ 19. bee is eonabaticman “|B Zz Ce 1‘. W 36t LA _ 
giass. excellent condt« 


- : : ” i ; rie G 3" 23 enc Br ra, 26 Court St. Bklyn . + 
f K166 7 6 E 42 S |pay advance Rapid Simplex, 312 E 234.j|Wood Electric ©, 826 Bway (cor 12 St).|vs coms. Enc Britannica, graduate. O506 Times a J ’ 
> , . ‘ - =| Cook -houseworker, = 2 adults, refs.|\ WOMAN, 60, going Florida Now 1%, care SHOWE ASES 
= . . m4 | ; 1 designer, tomatic machinery; si-|Salesman, expd selling hardware. Manhat i \ ite, J a . going ~ . . 
sanders, expe, 6 days, | SHA-8i6 Fink-|Night clerk. tramseript-front desk exper! samt Kelly B; all> Michie aalt. BO/Tee Ser san Ean 7+ poshlian Lighting, 16 Warren St Situations Wanted—Male Call AM, TR 4-2533, 7 W 81 St. Apt_9A.| elderly ‘people; capable housekeeper-cook | tion: reasonable _Phor ioe 
' ave (16% — : : : . ' “aint " - ; Cook-housewrkr, 5 rooms, business couple,jHahn. 212 Eldert St. Sklyn 0 OP DES 72 exquisite mahoe 
, . : ref es.1P man. millers. steady job for good|Tool & die makers, ex cutters, Jewelry;|Salesman, large paper products mfr; est) AGCOUNTANT, 39, 19 years’ experience, , S - , seta! : , 7. 
Locker rm and maintenance sen live = [ced gma, See :, cond pay ; re acne ome - = ~ s mA jo £ oes on emi ee “ 128 wi seth |Satecs ss: comm. R1055 Times Downtown desires 3 days week with accountant. |Schoolgirl; no laundry. Kraus, CO 5-5616./\YOUNG lady wishes position as lady's ' att : “5 ah . u : 
e <mry ene — : at : | . * 2 > Times oFSKS olding Chairs and Tracks 


rn ~ ; - « oP 5 = ite 3 adults; no} companion: good ref V525 
_ . 3x2? ac en “ 35-15 36 Av,| Toolmakers, to ay, ist cl men: 58-hour|Salesmen, retail men's clothes, furnishings; |S15 day O1 Times 4 _|Cook-houseworker, white; $i ot < , ~ —_ 
Machine shop helper strong, ex-service Offset pressman, 17x ig a “hag — feeder steady 4 . ws _~ sctentifie Machine. 229 W 28th.!|$65. Wallace Agency, 175 5 Av ACCOUNTANT CPA, 35. unusually heaw Sundays: references. CI 6-2875 CTLTURED. middle-aced widow, educated! Bookcase Cus AUS! i ‘v, 


- te Hobt 67 VW ster St. Cit white permanent Rox 9 >, 


part-time arrange-'Cook, light housewk, family 4; nice home convent normal school: Protestant. com-|STEEL files, letter legal size et 





Madison, R 302. |CAPABLE executive, assistant, experienced room. bath a, 5602, collect WOMAN. Jewish, intelligent, companion|STEEL shelving. partitions, office and face 


e plant eX ent opr X2651 Times. |mar 


, 








#2 , 5 : pew Salesman, comml state te, followg pfd background eeks % : 
aa aed Bi sendy: pans Somme “Tete Cae | heal : oad 3 t . stmt ™m po ment ith practitioner O48 Times (R°4.Park A RI’ 8. 166 panion refined lady. Davis. VA 6-44%4 adding machine Li S 2845 Messing 


» hi ef s t ivy: N nterview Office boys, messengers, ages, 16-20; CPA Pressman n 
oe Taher. “> “ - cleat RI f $2 } Ce St t 1Mm1 Tin Downtown Rek-O-Kut, 173 Lafavette WA 1787 comn ’ 





THE NEW YORK TIMES, NOV. 1, 1944. 


RADIO TODAY 


NESDAY, NOV. 1, 1044 
Rebroadcast of Speech in Buffalo on Oct. 31- 


Wanted to Purchase 
Machinery and Tools Wanted 


GRINDER WANTED 
Grenby External 
Oo G or 1G Brown 
& Sharpe automatic screw ma 
chine Also Kwikway grinder 
WALKER 5-8363 


$5 Office Furniture—Store Fixtures Wanted! 


DRAWING boards, desks, files, etc. wanted.| 
ivate party, MU 5-8124 


BARGAIN. wood coeaiions 
desks, files, tables Bendel, 25 
Pianos—Musical Instruments Wanted | 
BABY GRANDS WANTED 
ANY MAKB-ANY SIZE 
SPINETS, SMALL UPRIGHTS 
Steinway Grands Urgently 
NEEDED AT ONCE 
HIGH IMMEDIATE CASH 
EDITH IRWIN. 126 WEST 23 ST 


CHELSEA 2-8353 


Merchandise for Sale 


“Pianos—Musical Instruments 
REBUILT Spinet type pianos from $295; 
rebu famous make grands from %365 
Gone in our wh shop by exper 
en evenings Wurlitzer, 120 
42 St. bet Bway & 6 Av 
sTEINWAYS, MASON-HAMLINS 
Kr es. Chickering wher fine grands 
$38 smail planos. $245 rentals 
up Powers M 
STEINWAY 
Perfect Bargzain—Te! 
20 E MM ST 
STEINWAY, 
grands 3S 


Weather Forecast 


NEW YORK CITY AND VICINITY—Sunny 
and somewhat warmer with moderate 
to fresh winds today 

EASTERN NEW YORK — Considerable 

cloudiness, rather windy one a littie 

warmer toda Fair in south tomorrow 7 

mostly cloudy and a little cooler in WED 

north portion 

ESTERN NEW YORK—Some cloudiness; Governor Dewey: 

rather windy and continued warm today WOR, 1430-1. 

d tomorrow o - oe 

NEW JERSEY—Fair, a little warmer and|Discussion: ‘“‘Books Are Bullets, 
breezy today and tomorrow, seabeciend WOQXR, §-5: 15 » ene 

CONNECTICUT—Some hig clow . = eo 26 

Mostly cloudy, with} Comedy Show: ‘Can You Top This WOR, 7 088 
“Easy Aces,"’ Comedy; Jane and Goodman Ace—WABC, 


and warmer today 
« < ature change tomorrow ; 
——— X Symphony Hall: Haydn's Symphony No. 99 in E Flat—WQXR, 
8:05-9. 


: HER 
| COUNTRY-WIDE WEATHE Joseph Dunninger, Mentalist--WJZ, 9-9:50 
Frank Sinatra, Songs; Charles Boyer, Guest—WABC, 9-9:30 


TEMPERATURES 
at tty following, record of owe itations|Gov. Thomas KE. Dewey, From Boston—WEAF, WOR, 9:30-10. 
yesterday the temperatures given are the}/Sumner Welles, Comments WOR, 10-10:15 
Oa Or RITE ing. twenty-four ae ass. Great Moments in_ Music: Natalie Bodanya, Segrene: meee 
DrEWAS 7 aT u di are in Eastern owe, Tenor; Suzanne Sten, Soprano; ugene 
Y GRANDS ANY SIZE) oa tine.) ex iciae stg Basso; Robert Weede, Baritone; Cesare Sodero, Conductor— 
rae dn ue eal | Official Temperatures WABC, 10-10:30. 
me Low. |Nelson Eddy, Baritone; Gloria Scott, Soprano; Concert Orches- 
1 4 tra—WABC, 10:30-11. is 
Mpls St Pi...76 a7|Arthur Hopkins Presents: Play, ‘‘Beyond the Horizon, With 


SPINETS UPRIGHTS) : i P mene 
: ‘ : ; = 
Call 9 AM to 10 PM Weekday 8) . ' ; aes igh + 

New Orleans..75 56 Aline MacMahon, Philip Huston, Harold Vermilyea—WEAF, 
Nocbik es 42|__:11:30-12:30 A. M. 


CASH IMMEDIATELY Atlanta 73 47 
Norfolk . 68 42 


CIRCLE 5-9830 Atlanite City.61 < 
CIRCLE 6-6345 Binghamton 68 28 
PIONEER Okla. City....80 58|Concert Orchestra, Bernard Herrmann, Conductor; 
Omaha 62 47 vieff, Violin—WABC, 11:30-12. 
Paleecighta +4 (Note: Other political broadcasts are listed with political news)|' 


Bismarck 7% 33 
| ___—-258 W_55 ST, NEW YORK ___ Boston 57 30 
PIANOS WANTED 
Phoenix ‘ 7 
Pittsbur: ‘ 
hand, Where there is no listing for a station the preceding 
program is on the air 


Buffalo 70 39 
Butte 43 37 
URGENTLY NEEDED Charleston... .78 
| IMMEDIATE CASH Portland, Me.48 
61 
GRANDS, SPINETS Ralelah a ri 
SMALL UPRIGHTS Richmon sn a a a a aan aa 
50 MORNING 
WMCA—N. Y. Times News 
WNYC—Masterwork Hour 


Chicago 7 
Cincinnati ,..77 
se os Salt L. City.. f 
POWERS, 45 WEST 57 San Antonio.. 
> q i 
FURS—ONE-OF-A-KIND—COATS PLAZA 3-9574 
ur coats, $69.95 up Beautiful fur} 
ed tu WHN—Gloom Dodgers (To 1) 
WNEW—Dick Brown. Sengs 


Te 


Lae 


WiIZ.... T7 
WLIB ..11990 
WMcA.. 5? WPaT ago 
WNEW .11 | WOXR. i500 
WNYC... 630) WWRL. igs 


woR 
wov 


WEAF... 640 
WEVD. .1590 
WHN. ..1080 
WHOM.1440 
WINS... 1010 


THE WEATHER IN THE NATION 


MAP PREPARED AT U. 5. WEATHER BUREAU 
P.M. OCTOBER 31, 1944 


Cylindrica Model 


~ EG #12 


terms ‘ 


NEWS BROADCASTS 
Every hour on th r 
from 8 A. M. through 11 P.M. 
NEW YORK TIMES news bulle- 
tins over WMCA—57T9 
we 


Morning 
00-WABC a. 45 ‘TY 
e-WHN WLiB 
30-WEAF WOR oan 
WMCA_ WNEW =a. 
:06-WEAF WOR tye 
WABC. WNYC 9: 00- WabC 
05-WQXR 9: 38-WNEW 
15-WMCA, WHN | %55-WOXR 
:25-W xR 16: @- WOR 
30-WEAF. wnhewi!* 15-WEA?P 
:45-WJZ, WABC (16: 38-WMCA 
55-WQXR, WLap #0:55-WOXR 
:00-WEAF. WOR, /11:00-WoeR, 
WJZ. WABC wnrec 
WMCA. WNYC ([i1:30-WJZ. WMCA, 
:30-WEAP, WMCA WNEW 

11:35-WQxR, WL 


WNEW 
Afterneon 
2:00-WEAF. WOR 3:38-WABC WMCA, 
WABC, WMCA ¥NEW 
12:30-WOR, WJZ, ewNTC 
WNEW ssw Gx a | 
2 45-WHN | &00-WOR, WJZ, 
:55-WQXR. WLIB | “irs 
:00-WJZ, WMCA |. 0. 
:30-WABC, WHN, | #25-% 5 
WNEW - w MCA, 
-45-WEAF | wNEY - 
55-WQXR, WLIB | s-WQxR, WU 
00-WOR, WJZ 0. WMCA 
WMCA,. WNYC 15-* QXR 
30-WOR, WNEW | 5:25-WQXR 
:§5-WQXR, WLIB | 5:30-WMCA, W™EW 
3:00-WMCA $.55-WLIB 
Evening 


6:00-WEAF. WOR. . $:8-WNEW 
WJZ, WABC | 9:55-WNYC 
WMCA, WQXAR, 16: ¢@- WIZ 
WLIB 10: 15-WOR 
6:25-WQXR. WLIB 6: 38-WMCA, WEF 
6:380-WOR, WMCA. |1e rT 
WHN, WNEW 1 
6:45-WEAF. WIZ, 11 
WaBC WNYC ' 
7:00-WOR, WMCA 


WHN /QxR 
7 1S WEE 
7:25-WQXR 
7:30-WMCA 
7: 45-WEAF 
8:06-WOR, WJZ 

WMCA. WQXRP 
8: 30-WNEW 
8:45-WNYC, WEVD 
8: 55-WABC 
9:00-WOR, WMCA 

wQxR 2 


BY SHORT WAVE 

Eastern War—Megacycies 
LONDON 

11:00 A. M.. 12 Noon—I5.38 

6S P. M1100, 938 

M—@53_ 611 Pp 

M., 12. A. M—O.@, O58, TB, 


7th lw 
GRAND PIANO 

ms BALDWIN 
PL 3-7186 
Hardman 
uprights; | 


AO 


yi Pa Bennett Cerf, Foster Hailey— 


chair, 
Ww 
Knabe, Chickering, 
on sale, Steinway 
studio $180; uprights $55. Ross, $4 W 57th.| 
MINNIE plano by Hardman Peck, prac 
tically new, wheat ior: modern: $28 
only Phone EI »-0979 
Ludwig, complete, good condi 
iPM ES 3509. Principals 


p pals 
DRI M set 


after 
is wiz 


onl 
SALE, 116 Pianos, 


right 1 spinet 


$185; small up 
from $175 
2 cr 


grands, 
styled 
Steinway special Kiein, 421 WV 
STEINWAY baby grand, late model. bar-| 
gain Curtis, 240 W 55th | 
SMALL grand piano, immediate sacrifice; | 
$265. Hartman, 258 W 55th 
BEAUTIFUL baby grand for 
vate party DI 2-3678 
NOVACHORD Hammond, 
$1,500. X2630 Times 
SPINET styled and grand pianos, 
$245; terms. Weser, 524 W 43 St. 
WATERS uprights $75, others $35 up, de- 
livered. Tuner, TR 5-9354. ? 
STEINWAY Baby Grand, exquisite tone 
Sacrifice, $450. Babel," 126 W_ 23d. _ 
BABY grand, von fine upright, $85. An- 
dersen, 5 


CMCA 


wLis 
WMca 





IT ME 


kae® 3 


sale by pri- 
Miami onal 


ee kek ee ee ee 


late model, 
from 


Miriam Solo- 


al 
J 





a ‘Safes 
NEW Large Size “‘A”’ 


delivery. also wall safes 


MOSI “ER Safe. 5 AV at 32d. LA 4-3800 
Wearing Apparel | 


Label 


Safes | 


ST 


5:00-WABC—News; Variety Music 
5:30-WABC—Revetlle Sweetheart 
5:45-WOR—Farmers’ Digest 
6:00-WJZ—Sunrise Salute 
WHN—Radio Newsreel 
WNEW—Recorded Music 


:15-WABC—Democratic Campaign Talk 
:30-WEAF—Farm News 
WOR—News; Sun-Up Society 
WABC—Arthur Godfrey 
WMCA—News; Dude Ranch Music 
WNEW—News; Recorded Music 
:45-WNEW—Morning Meditations 
:00-WEAF—News, Variety Musicale 
WOR—News; Musical Clock 
WJZ--Ed Fast Variety Show 
WABC—News; Arthur Godfrey 
WMCA—Gospel Church 
WNYC—News; Sunrise Sympfiony 
WHN, WNEW-—Recorded Music 
WQXR—Headlines and Harmonies 
05-WQXR—News Reports 
:10-WQXR—Headlines and Harmonies 
:15-WMCA—News, Recorded Music 
WHN—News:; Music Shop 
:25-WQXR—News Reports 
30-WEAF-—News: Don Goddard 
WNEW—News: Recorded Mu 
WQXR-—Breakfast Symphony 
:45-WEAF—Golden Gate Quartet 
WJZ, WABC—News Reports 
WMCA—Help Wanted Reporter 
WLIB—Studio Music 
XR, WLIB—News Reports 
[-AF—World News Round-Up 
Rabinson 
News 





Cleveland ....72 
Denver 49 
San Diego . 
— S. Francisco.. : 
mmed ¢ coats. $34.95 up. Plain) STEINWAY GRANDS!!! 
fo x ) Ss from $21.95 : 
ie s ‘Ai gee i PIpTANOS WANTED AT ONC] WQXR—B-Lines—Angeline Dougherty 5 
:03-WMCA—Alice Hughes, Talk 


Detroit 71 
S. Ste. Marie.53 
$10 95a cea’ pckett|>TANOS WANTED AT ONCE} 
:15-WOR—Bing Crosby Records 


Duluth 69 
Savannah , 
ARROWS SHOW GENERAL FLOW CP AIR fx 
scarfs All moderately priced Deposits} 
> | 
UDIO UPRIGHT “Stine | WABC—School of the Air 


ZSSESBRSASSLeSE 


35|Washington .. 


52 wroxXR 


WMcCA 


Seattle 
St. Louls.. 
WMCA—Talk—Isabella Beach 
WLIB—Concert Music 
WQXR—Keyboard Stylist 
30-WEAF—Adelaide Hawley, Talk 
WOR-—Food—A. W. McCann 
WMCA—Vartety Musicale 
WNEW~News, The Wife Saver 
WQXR—Pop Concert 
45-WEAF— Hollywood Review 
WAHBC—This Life ls Mine 
55-WQXR—News Reports 
WLIB—News; Music 
00-WEAF—Lora Lawton 
WOR—News—Henry Gladstone 
WJZ—My True Story 
WABC—Valiant Lady 
WMCA—N. Y¥. Times News 
WNYC—This Week With the OPA— 
Daniel P. Woolley 
WNEW—Make-Believe Ballroom 
WQXR—Run of the House—Charlotte 
Adams 
@3-.WMCA—Piano Music 
15-WEAF—Robert St. John. News 
WOR—Bessie Beatty Show 
WABC—The Light of the World 
WMCA—The Little Show, Variety 
WNYC—Music Album 
WQXR—Inspirations 
25-WJZ-—A Cappella Choir 
30-WEAF~-Finders Keepers 
WJZ—Hollywood Revue 
WABC—This Changing World 
WMCA—News, Recorded Music TMA 
WNYC—BBC Morning News 6:58 P 
WNEW—News, Recorded Music 
WQXR—Composers’ Corner 
45-WJZ—The Listening Post 
WABC—Bachelor’s Children 
WMCA—Democratic Campaign Talk 
WNYC—Junior High School Forum 
55-WQXR—News Reports 
WLIB—News:; Music 
00-WEAF—Road of Life 
WOR —News—Prescott Robinson 
WJZ—Breakfast With Breneman 
WABC—Amanda—Sketch 
WMCA—N_ Y. Times News 
WNYC—News Reports 7 | 
WQXR—Other People’s Business— 
Alma Dettinger 
:03-WMCA—Recorded Music 
:15-WEAF—Rosemary—Sketch 
WOR—Talgs and Music 
WABC—Sé@cond Husband 
WNYC—Ration and Food Talks 
:25-WNYC—Musical Souvenirs 
:30-WEAF—Star Playhouse 
WOR—Quiz Wizard 
WJZ—News—Gilbert Martin 


Fort Worth. ..83 
accepted. Hours 9-7, Thursdays until 9 " ; 
STUDIO UPRIGHTS, SPINETS Cold front, a boundary line, Stationary front, an air mass|patterns which control air flow. 


Galveston 80 
Hartford 58 
P M. Estab 1918. Barr Studio, 10 E 534.| 
PERSIAN Paw, Grey, sports model, like! MESSINA i144 W 23D CHelsea_2-7994 | between cold air and a mass of boundary which shows little or Labels in millibars and inches. 
PIANOS WANTED in arnter air, under which the Winds are counter-clockwise 


CITY WEATHER RECORDS 


Official Temperatures 
Tem.Hu 
Sl 


aU 
0 
oi 
49 
48 
48 
48 
4s 


53 


Houston 81 
Indianapolis 77 
new Hudson Seal jackets bargains. | 
Size 16 _Ol._2-6518 IMMEDIATE CASH no movement 
CIRCLE 7-0994 colder air pushes like a wedge, i toward the center of low-pres- 
lusually advancing southward Occluded front, a line along) eure systems, and clockwise 


Jacksonville ..78 
BEAUTIFUL Persian 16-| 
HALIFAX, 325 W 57 . 
jand eastward which the cold front has over-jand outward from high-pres- 


new 


lamb coat, size 


1 lust gale skin like 
$400. TR & ST 
MOUTON 


Kansas City. .82 
Los Angeles. ..66 
Louisville 76 
Memphis i) 
TMissing. 
Ru 
yOOT 
PIANOS WANTED a 
dispose ntering a0 ‘Tim ANS EM ALL UPRIGHTS! Warm front, a boundary be-jtaken the warm front and has|sure areas . 
BAUM MARTEN cape, 20-skin dyed; $350. \nRODWIN. 115 W 8D CH 2-4 witween warm air and a retreat- lifted all the warmer air above} Pressure systems usually 
south will sell crows tox| U PRIGHT PIANOS WANTED)! colder air over|the surface move eastward at an average 
t t $50. Cl 6-9434 ALL TYPES. IMMEDIATE CASH jwhich the air is forced| Jsobars (solid black lines /|movement of 500 miles a day 
tional Piz 1% ¢ Mt 115 
Pia ne 0 Bway 1U 4 it advances, usually north-\are lines of equal barometrici|in the summer and at a rate of 
lward and eastward. pre ssure and form pressure\i700 miles a day in the winter. 


excellent con 
- x) 


12-14 
ward 


Noon 

M 

M 
| rr 
M.... 
Ms 
M 
M 
M 
M 


SCBIBRVAWNeK DD 


lamb coat 


dresses. entire oobe 


> 


|SPINETS 


LADY ng wedue of a 
} WNEV 

jacket i i 
MINK coat, like new 
fice. Ca 20 Bway. Rm 


14, never 


moving 
fe« 


warm 


” 
sacri-| Na 
3 23.| 


ap- 


tanedo style; 
OS Wo 2 


|as 

PIANOS WANTED os 

MAKE ANY SIZE 76 
BARTHEL, Circle 5-9830 
PIANOS WANTED 
IMMEDIATELY BARNETT 

335 up }CONCOURSE (187TH). FO 17-9647 

pes and| BABY Grand, Spinet or Studio 
£2 wanted: distance 1 yDject Call 

HIROPODY EQUIPM’T | 86-6626, 9-12 -6 or write, Piano 

Repair Service Pp. 43 W_ SSth 


|WANTED good 

e 

ye 4 or inets: Steinways preferred 
wea 


9.7548 | ANDERSI N, 52 W S7TH. CO 5-9532 
2" HAMMOND Organ wanted for church. 1 
j 
ji 


worn. For 


MINK coat, size 
pointment. AS 4 
BKILVER fox jacket, size 
sonable, new Lydia Fur 
Miscellaneous 
» lamps new, used 
and flu aK 
metabolism 


2 
> 


|ANY CaSH | 
65 


>>> >>> >> >>>e 
a 


c 


14-16; 
LA 4- 


very 
B54 


rea- 


ROOKLYN 
BROOELY Temperature Data 


(Ending 4:30 P. M 


Highest yesterday, 59 at 3:10 P. M. 
Lowest yesterday, 47 at 6:45 A. M. 
Mean yesterday, 53 

Normal on this date, 50 
Departure from normal 
Departure this month 
Departure since Jan. 1 
Highest this date last year 
Lowest this date last year, 41 
Mean this date last year, 49 
Highest mean this date, 66 
Lowest mean this date, 37 
Highest this date, 75 in 1933 
Lowest this date, 29 in 1917 


M 
00 





Fire Record \, 

G TS Tuesday, Oct a, 1944 7 

| a MUS’ ey = a te 
| 
| 
| 


Total loss CS—Considerable 10°55. 
The Celanese Hour 


MANHATTAN iP M 
Occupant 12:30 
presents selection from 
Verdi's 


“RIGOLETTO” 


Netalie Bedenya soprane 
Suzanne Sten Meszszo-soprane 
Morton Bowe tenor 
Robert Weede baritone 
Cosere Sodere conductor 


TONIGHT 


10 P. M. 
WABC 


ALSO ON WABC—FM 
PRESENTED BY 
Celanese Corporation of America 


@Reg. U. 5. Pat. OF. 


CASH 2350, 


4 Clarkson Ave not 
given 
—Grand St. and Kent Ave 
not given 
4 1 St not given 
156 5 Ave Samuel 


auto 


SL) 


SI 
SL 
TF 


HANOVIA sun 
shock} 
a he ies ate 
PHYSICIAN 
Equipment 
We BUY 
BEE! RAY AND 
; Jerome Av, Bronx 
MOLYBDENUM wire 
t approximately 
{ nif t “ 


pric 


uprights| 
Circle Time 


Sales 


ay 
auto 


lizers 
:00-W 
WOR—News—Prescott 
WJZ—-Martin Agronsky, 
WABC—News Reports 
WMCA—N. Y, Times News 
WNYC—News, Morning Serenade 
WLIB-Young People's Church 
WQXR—Breakfast Symphony 
:03-WMCA—Milt Herth Trio 
:15-WEAF—Jay Johnson, Songs 
WOR—Aunt Jennie 
WJZ—Conversations With 
Allen E. Claxton 
WABC—Phil Cook Music 
WMCA—Unity Viewpoint 
:20-WNYC—Music Moods 
:25-WNYC—Consumers’ Guide 
:30-WEAF—News; Charles McCarthy 
WOR—Talk—Pegeen Fitzgerald 
WJZ—Nancy Craig, Talk 
WABC—Missus Goes A-Shopping 
WMCA—News: Recorded Music 
WNYC—Food—Margaret Conner 
WNEW—News, Recorded Music 
WLIB—Morning Overture 
:35-WNYC—Morning Serenade 
:45-WEAF—Talk—Rod Hendrickson 
WABC—Talk—Margaret Arlen 
WNYC—News: New York Today 
WHN—News Report 
WLIB—News: Household Hints 
8:55-WOR,. WJZ. WQXR—News Reports 
9:00-WEAF—Mirth and Madness 
WOR—Talk—Victor H. Lindlahr 
WJZ—Breakfast Club, Variety WABC—Bright Horizon 
ABC—News Re WMCA—News; Hollywood Revue 


AFTERNOON es. 


12:00-WEAF—News—Don Goddard WABC—Joyce Jordan. M. D. 4: 15-WEAF—Stella Dallas 
WOR—Boake Carter, News WMCA-—N. Y. Times News WOR—Sunny Skylar 
WJZ—Glamour Manor, With Cliff WNYC—News Reports WJZ—Don Norman 
Arquette, Others WQXR—Concert Music 4:30-WEAF—Lorenzo J 
WABC—Kate Smith Chat :03-WMCA—Recorded Music WOR—Food and Home Forum 
WMC4—N. Y. Times News :05-WNYC—Symphonic Matinee WJZ—News. Westbrook Yaa 
WNYC—Music for Defense Plants 15-WEAF—Today’s Children WABC—Recorded Music 
WNEW—Denver Darling, Songs WOR—Talk—Jane Cowl WMCA—News: Piano Musie 
WQXR—Luncheon Concert WJZ—Galen Drake WNEW—News. Aces Music 
:03-WMCA—Jerry Lawrence Records WABC—Two on a Clue . ‘ atan tin 
:15-WEAF—Talk—Maggi McNellis WEAF—Women in White 4:45-WEAF—Young Widder Brows 
WOR—Music at Midday WOR—News; Prescott Robinson WJZ—Hop 
WABC—Big Sister WJZ-—Ladies, Be Seated 
:30-WEAF—U. S. Air Force Band WABC--Young Dr. Malone 
WOR—Governor Dewey: 1 Oct. at | WNEW—News; Variety Music 


4 


2:00 
5:45, 6 
9:06 P 
10:45 P 
641 


& 
Rented 
Medical 
MEDICAL 
Phone RA 
6.005 inches 
five mil 1 meter 
feale eg 


1060 rime 


Frontiew “9 

+1 
+515 

57 


srands, small uprights) 
Jacob Beck- 


SL 


2111 
off 
1 Ave. and 55 
of Sanit 
SL 659 E. 17 St 
si| 4:10-6914 16 Ave.: ¢ 
nae 1b—38 N. 15 St 
TF 5—Front of 1347 
SL not given SL 
not 1052 E. 52 St.: Joseph Tepper cs 
TF ~Nassau St. and Flatbush Ave 
SI Ext auto: not given SL 
108 Carrell St not given TF 
514 Howard Ave: Rose Herman NG 
437 Prospect Ave not given SL 
99 Ridgewood Ave not given SL 
194 Flatbush Ave. Ext not given. TF 
64 St. Edwards St.; not given SL 


QUEENS 


Northern Bivd.. Little 
ome. Neck Sam Hokstein 
10:50—114-18 159 Ave,, Ozone Park; Plativ —8: 30 M.., 
pu Phillip Schneiaet ¥ a Se a 

| recipitation—8 . M. 
1:25—152-11 89 Ave.. Jamaica; Mar? 7PM an _- 


TF 
Immaculate Hospital 
ices * of 
SL| The sun rises at 7 


TF! 3:05—32-26 41 St., Astoria 
SL} gan ; 

Jamaica: J. Cohen.SLisets at 5:53 P. M 
SL! 7:55—42-48 48 St. LIC: Mae Henry..SLiarea. 


M Albemarle Rd.: 


45 


Damage 


not 
l 
TF 


Location 
Front of 4 W 
given 
45-2204 7 Ave 
30-200 W. 60 St 
30-552 W. 146 St not given 
15—23 E. 117 St not given 
2>-—-Centre and Worth Sts.; taxi 

given 

%—1995 2 Ave 
50-66 Mott St 
15—398 Water St 
15-30 E. 22 St.; 
M 


> 


S xX 
moscow 
M.—15.75 
M.—15.23. 15.11 
MELBOURNE 
MO. 
BERNE 


M—¢O 18 
STOCKHOLM 
00 A. M.—15.155 
FROM ENEMY SOURCES 
BERLIN 
230A. M—1S1 
9:00. 11:00 P M.—T.% 
venre 


auto 0 St.: auto: Dept 


Wood, 31 David St, Great Kills, Staten 
land, N. ¥ 
UNUSUALLY high 
upright or apinet 
ALgonguin 4-5682 
CASH for pianos, appraising free. Klein.) 
’ : oe Be 421 W 28 St. CH 4-1923 
ag RP eye no con Bing NDs, ights, spinets; 
a pa Cc urtis, 24 10 W eth 
BABY grands, Spinets or uprights: 
fluted, beech, birch &| Spero. JErome 7-3417 
| GRANDS, spinets and 
Krakauer, 107 W 57th 
WE buy your piano at a good price. Call 
Custin WA 717-7427 2240 Amsterdam. | 
7H cash prices for all types of pianos.| 
urlitzer, 120 W_42 St, WI 7-8143.__ "| 
Radios Wanted | 
RADIO PHONO COMBINATION 
Small Radios and Personal Types 
1936 models or later bought at amaz- | 
ing prices Call we 2-7723, or write 
RADIO ROW, 172 Greenwich St 
2-90 | ARMY officer wishes to buy small radio 
‘AIR CONDITIONER ~~ | that doesn’t work ill fix it himself 
Half ton, air devices corp, window model,j/Apt 4J. 2 Horatio St. Tel HA 2-6657 bet 
$265 RE 2-0319 mare F FS ~ 
SUBSTANTIAL quantity 3-ounce bottles, Safes Wanted 
suitable t ilet goods, 20 millimeter open- ——“SAPES MODERN SAFES 
et canes B‘ ‘UGHT, SOLD AND MOVED 


REFRIGERATOR, washing machine: THE MOSLER SAFE CO. 
5TH AV AT 32 ST LA 4-3800 


any time 116 E 724. RH 4-9172 
Wanted to Purchase \SAFES, small & medium sizes; modern 
types. York Safe & Lock Co, 102 Maiden 


~Business—Office Machines Wanted n 
HIGH cash prices for your surplus equip-|Lane WHitehall 3-0696 on Pe Jacobs, 873 Columbus AV 
—, " office, business|SAFES, all types, any quantity. Standard|‘"*"! call at your home.) AC 2-8500 

mach "files lockers, kardexes Safe Co, 138 Lafayette St. WO 4-6560 

m any eee GF Geln.t” .. een. .atee _ 
Dennett 7 Broadway Worth 2-0248.} Wearing Apparel Wanted 
ASTOUNDING prices pald, typewriters, | HIGH CASH = a 

adding machines, addressographs, dicta- For worn—slight y use 
phones, mimeogray safes, lockers | Ladies Fur Coats, Chokers, Jackets 
office furnit. Schroeder E42. MU 2-9299 , r — —_,, 
OFFICE machines, files, ,safes, lockers, wy hy * ry Ge | 
Mardexes, partitions ASS EF 36 WM St PE 6-1658 
HAND or electric adding machine UNA BIG CASI PRICE — 


SL 
SI 
cs 


00. not given 
Verga 
Advance Pressure 


E. 46 St auto 


not given 
not given 


grand,| 
Wilson 
} 


6 
Bownt 
BELL A 


ject 


prices paid for 
pianos 


k 
without 
“ 


S00 A 
oo P 


Victor God—Dr 
exhaust/ 


advertis 
UN|© 


camera 
er 


HOWELL 
gas stove 


movie 
10 


Apex iror 
20. 

35 Precipitation Data 
(Ending 8:30 P. M.) 

Total this month to date, 3.44, 

Departure from normal, —.09 

Total since Yan. 1, 41.44 

Departure from normal. +4.88 

Normal this month, 3.53 

Days with rain this date, 23 since 1871 

Greatest amount this month, 11.55 


1903 
Least amount this month, 30 in 1924. 


saage 
equipment 


high prices) As 
not given —Talk 
not given 
not given 
not given 


1> 
45— 
00- 
LS 
0 
8:15 


SL 
SL 
SL 


LUMBER, iAxid, cash 
maple ess tha 
molding: ide for t 
rifice Fieischman 
VULCANIZED fiber, 
1/16 3/32” thick 


ther 


ths also 


lengt 
y manufactur 
WA 99-4551 
150,000 tbs @ 2le Ib, 
also cut to specifica-| 
tion at low cost. Write Hodge Company,/HI 

71 Bond St, Springfield, Mass | W 
NEON signs, one 6-foot projection reading 

Beauty Salon’’ and one fiat wall sign 
readin Permanent Waving’’: good con- 
diti VA_6-2859 | 
PAINT- lacquer, only 1500 gallons left; 2) 
dollars per g n in 54-gal drums. Hazel-| 
rn, 1640 Bedford Av. IN 3 40. 


uprights wanted 
CI 6-0840 
Second Ave. exit 
Bridge: auto; 
50—251 W. 26 St 
55-352 Greenwich St.:; 
45—120 Vermilyea Ave. 
5:15—2 Montgomery St.: 
:20—Front of 842 6 Ave 
given 
31—1 W. 72 St.: not given 
50—80 Crosby St.; not given 
00—158 St. and Broadway: auto 
given 
25-306 Water St.;: 
20—304 E. 15 St.: 
30-1235 Park Ave 


of Queensboro 
not given 
not given 
not given 
not given 
not given 
auto: 


SL 
SL 
SLIAM 
TF] 7:40— 
SL 
not 
SL 
TF 


in 


Recorded Music 


on. 
254-11 WNEW—News 


69; 8:30 
8:30 


WOR—What's 

WJZ—Jack Berch 

WABC—Aunt Jenny 5 

WNYC—Time to Get 

Dr Jerome S. Peterson 

11:55-WOR—Lanny and Ginger, Songs 

WLIB—News heon Music 

WQXR—News Reports 


none 


not 





Jul 
pyres 26 A. M. today and 


cr 
in the metropolitan 


not given 
auto: not given 


not given 


SL} 5:40—91-24 168 St 


— 


State Guard Orders 


Special to Tus New York TIMES. 
ALBANY, Oct. 31—The Adjutant General 
released the following orders today: 
Halsey, Maj. C. D., 17th Regt. to Head- 
quarters 24 Battalion 
Bean, Ist Lt. EB. L., 24 Regt. 


list 





Wanted to Purchase 


POLITICAL ADVERTISEMENT 


EB LIBERAL PARTY 


Continues its Analysis of 
the Issues of the Campaign 


— Songs 
Show 


Wearing Apparel Wanted 


PAY high prices for men’s suits & over- 


— 
mes 
News 


to reserve y [cErns 


furniture 


Miscellaneous Wanted 


WATER COOLERS 
any condition; high 
3-6562. Aqua Cooler 


unit heater, good condition, 
125-14 & UAC 175-14 or equivalent 
Hollywood Novelty Co, 403 3 Av. 
ARMY sabre & chain wanted, good 
$22; call 6 to 10 P M. Wil- 
Teaneck 7-8338 
Tumbling 
Sagamor Metal Goods Corp, 
Av. Milltown, N J 


40 ft long; 


safes 
quantity 


ines 
Ks, 


WQXR 
THE BEST IN MUSIC 
1560 ON YOUR DIAL 


Today's Highlights: 


10:30 A.M.: Composer's Corner— 
music from Bellini’'s “La 
Somnambula” & “Norma” 


8:00 P.M.: Symphony Hall pre- 
sents the rarely heard Iberia 
“Images” 


30- 


Wanted paid 


Call LO 
WANTED, 
VAC 


junits - 


prices 
— a Orchestre 
WNYC—London Le 
4:55-WQXR—News Rep 
WLIB—News 
5: 00-WEAF— ‘When a 
WOR—Uncile Do 
WJZ—Terry and 
WABC- Along Clu 
WMCA—N. Y Times News 
wnre YMHA Ma hoo 
: Piano 


sé 
of speech in Buffalo on Oct. 31 WQXR—Request Music 
WJZ—News;: Farm-Home Makers :45-WEAF—Hymns of All Churches 
WABC—Helen Trent WOR—Real Stories 
WNEW—News: Music .. WABC—Perry Mason 
:45-WABC—Our Gal Sunday eh tay ae Music 
ba gy Reports ~ ) 06-WEAF—A Woman of America 
WNEW—Opportunity _ Club—Thyra WOR—Martha Deane Program 
__ samter Wi inslow Sig Arno WJZ—Morton Downey, songs 
ae ee oe . WABC—Mary Marlin 
a ane coe WMCA-—N. ¥. Times News 
:00-WEAF—Mary Margaret McBride :03-WMCA—Piano Music 
ee a eee :15-WEAF—Ma Perkins 
Wore, a aes, Dems WJZ—Hollywood Star Time 
WABC—Life Can Be Beautiful WABC—Tena and Tim 
WMCA—N. Y. Times News WMCA—Ethel Colby—Talk 
WNYC—Missing Persons Alarms Friers Guest 
WHN—For Women Only 30-WEAF—Pepper Young's Family 
WNEW—Recorded Music WOR—Rambling With Gambling 
WQXR—Midday Symphony WJZ—Beautiful Music 
:03-WMCA—Recorded Music WABC—The High Places 
:05-WNYC—CDVO Program WMCA—News Reports 
:15-WOR—Terry’s House Party WNYC—Science in the News—Lucy 
WJZ—The Women's Exchange Clausen, Julius Postal 
WABC—Ma Perkins 


WHN—Bandstand Music 
:30-WOR—Lopez Orchestra WNEW—News:; Variety Music 
WABC—Bernardine Flynn, i5-WEAF—Racing: Pimlico Special 
WNYC—Pages of Melody WABC—News—Bob Trout 
WHN—News; Recorded Music WMCA—Recorded Music 
WNEW—News: Recorded Music WNYC—News: Ration Talk 
:45-WEAF—Morgan Beatty. News 55-WQXR—News Reports 
WOR—American Woman's Jury WLIB—News; Music 
WJZ-—Galen Drake 00-WEAF—Backstage Wife 
WABC—The Goldbergs WOR—News—John Gambling 
WNYC—Story of New Amsterdam WJZ—Correspondents Abroad 
:55-WQXR—News Reports WABC—Wacs on Parade 
WLIB—News; Music WMCA—N. Y. Times News 
:00-WEAF—The Guiding Light WNYC—String Music 
WOR—Cerdric Foster, News WQXR—Symphonic Matinee 
WJZ—Walter Kiernan, News 03-WMCA—Ray Smith, Songs 


EVENING 


7: 30-WEAF— 
WOR—Can Yi 
Hirshfield 
Laurie Jr 
WJZ—The Lone Ranger 
WABC—Easy Aces 
WMCA—Johannes Steel 
WHN—Adrienne Ames 
WNEW—News Reports 
WQXR—Treasury of Music 





airl Marries 





s 
condition 
liam Murphy 
scarfs, etc LUPOMATIC 

CLOTHING | H240 


Dorothy S. Thackrey 


and Publisher, New York Post 


T. O. Thackrey 


yeneral Manager, New 


Ou 2 
the Pirates 


4-425 nathan Paid f rn or Slightly Used ner 


2 LADIES’ FUR COATS 


Wed. 

Nov. 1 
WABC 
6:15 P. M. 


model 
40 


Carpets and Rugs Wanted 
ORIENTAL RUGS BOUGHT, SPOT CASH) F 
Any onditior excelient prices paid 
BE JRE TO GET R UR OFFES Bway. CH 4-4408] Washington 


BASHIAN, 245 5 Av, N | -GET_OUR OFFER BEFORE Sesaey ig eran 
CALEDONI A 5-31! 51 A BIG CASH PRICE PAID oar i 


LADIES USED FUR COATS have you? 1230 Times 
roe A BSE ETC (EN'S CLOTHING | | 1934 edition City Land Book, 
WE PAY HIGH PRICES i 


1W Mt u WI 7-7969 sigelow Inc 
BARSAMIAN & CO. 245 5 Av 


miOEAE 2838" AUTOMOBILE EXCHANGE | 


CHINESE Grientals our oi 
cash; get my offer before selling 
fEDIATE ATT __FOR SALE AUTOS WANTED 
‘40 PACKARD “180” (L INC OLN — NEW Y ORK} 
DARRIN CONVE RTIBL E C’PE! veeds Fords Linc In Zephy ; 


IMMEDIATE ATTENTION 
RUGS di PARK 1OTO 
tadio, heat € whitewall < SALES 


barrels, 


kers 
USED 
‘ ! a 

Eyset 


Aditor and , York Poat x 


Beli issott 
WHN- -Recorded Music 
WQXR—Books Are Bu 

Cert: Foster Halley 

5:03-WMCA—Recorded Music 

5:15-WEAF—Portia Faces Life 
WOR—Chick Carter 
WJZ—Dick Tracy 
WNEW—Hollywood—Paula 
WQXR—The Washin 

Estelle M t 
XR—News 
TAP—Just F 


sirders 18” to 24”; 


Bronx 


rood condi- 
BU 8-6000 


FOR 
SC. “AR I 


Jlets—B. 


7uest 


enaes 


“WHY ROW F FOR F. D. R.?” 


a 


high Robert 
Stone 
Fron: 


Varian Fry 


e Director, American 
Iuternational 


Labor 
iffairs 


Executi 


Wed. Conference 
Nov. 1 Dr. Eduard C. Lindeman 
WMCA New York School of Social Work 
7:45 P. M. 


from Debussy’s 


9:30 P.M.: Cavalcade of Music 
with Milton Rettenberg, 
pianist 


Also F. M. Station 


WQXQ 


Dial 59 of 45.9 megacycles 
Carries W QXR Programs 
Between 5 P.M. and Midnight 


WARR 


(She agi mal irehentony 


on 


5: 25-W 
5: 30-W 


Mercur 


“HIGH 


Wir 


ORIENTAL CHINESE RUGS WANTED 
tl 8 
egarden, 12 E 12t! ST 9-597 f IACOD '& CO, re 884 Bway (62d) CO 5-7476 


Immediate High Cas! 2764 Bwa 
AC 4-2085 M. MICHIGAN 
Diamonds, Gold, Jewelry, Etc., Wanted 9 Bwa : Seth CA 5-7541 
We Pay Exceptionally Hich Prices "40 BL ICK “90L” L IMO. BL IC KS AND O1 HE RS 
All Makes. Models Bou ‘ 
re ORP. 


on 


“DUMBARTON OAKS AND 
THE LIBERAL VOTER” 


bet 
News 


Recorded 
ngs of 
rreil 


Page Far 
Adven 


WNEW—News 

WQxXR-—On W 
5: 45- WEAF—Front 
WOR—Tom 
WJZ—Capt 
WABC—W 
WMCA — 


PRICES PAID ORIENTAL 
DIAMONDS JEWELRY Ke Mee gl ; 
ieee STUDE BAKER, N. Y. |GLIDDEN BUIC K = 
i Broadway at 


a red Pearls : 4 
nt WILLIAMS CO, INC 
EMERAI! 7848} CIRCLE ¢ 


RUBIES—SAPPHIRES * CO 

2 CKETS 
PROVII yEN “4 T ICKETS ALL MAKES HIGH CASH PRICES PAID 
ALL MAKES-—ALL MODELS 


CASH AT ) WAITING P rT 
ALL MODELS 
GU R FE IN BUYERS GO ANYWHERE—ANY 


LOUIS & SON seme. an toes of 
HRY ELDORADO 5-832 


49t } On hand at OPA celling prices or | 
te MEdallion 
CONNETT 


4822 Estab, 1898/'42 cars req priority ts. Dealers wel 
DIL. 4\MONDS | 404-420 E 53 ST (1 AV 


PRECION . . JEWEL RY | 186th a — UR, en te 4450 : 4 = : Ls ) 
PROVIDEN T LO, 50-—URGENTLY NEEDED—50 
mit price paid for clean ound cars 


\N "TICKETS|'41 PACK'D CUSTOM BUILT) 7) 
if’ you sell now Don't BARON” LIMOUSINE | ANY MAKE, 1936 TO 1942 
“Aare lL, MOTORS (Auth |} 


ices 7 E 
CASH AT ONCE-—GI UR General Dual, 10 Whitewalls 
128th 


wait 
2100 Miles 
NATHAN HER M AN & McGUIRE CO (PACKARD) 


CARS Dr. George S. Counts 


Directoy Educational Foundations. 
Tea ‘ers College, Columbia Unit ersity 


Joseph V. O'Leary 


For State Comptroller 
Secre Liberal Party 


KI el . 
WQXR- ~Ma 3 
Sue Read 
5: 55-WLIB—News Repor 


TIME 
608 l 


ome 


cer 


Su 





mer 


fary, 


Ben Davidson 
Liberal Party 


Roth Orchestra: Ch 
uu Top This 
Senato: For 


rus 
Harry 
4. Joe 


6:00-WEAF—News—Don Hollenbeck 
WOR—Sidney Moseley, News 


WJZ—News Reports 
WABC—News Quincy Howe 
‘limes News 
Music 


WMCA—N. Y 

WNYC—United Nations 

WHN—Tod Williams—Talk 

WLIB—Clifford Evans, News 

WQXR-—News; Music to Remember 
6:03-WMCA—Help Wanted Reporter 


WJZ—ScramDy Amb 
WABC—Nelson Eddy 
Armbuster rchestr 
Soprano 
WMCA—Frank Kingdor 
WNEW—News. Mus 
WQXR—France 

M el P 


OFFER 
SON T B rd Rw! k 
~*" 151 Chestnut St. Ridgewood, N J. Tel 6-2200'° he 1720 


(“40 CADILLAC “75” Town Car WE PAY THE L IMIT 


Fleetwood, low mileage, black CIRCLE 6-02 35 


whitewalls, immaculate c¢ 
WILL SEND BUYER ANYWHERE 


recutive Director, 


on 


“THE LIBERAL PARTY 
IN ACTION” 


562 5 Av (Entrance 46tt 
te 400 ESTAB BR 9-8828 


DON’T SACRIFICE YOUR 
PROVIDENT TICKETS, others 


Su 
News 
eater mdition Talk 


Leon 


DIAMONDS JEWELRY WATCHE 
until you get our free estimate 
Provident Tickets Our Specialty 


(off Bway 7-f 


1936 PLYMOUTH 4-Pass Coupe 


18 5 St 


HUNTOON & RAFFO , 


5788 TIMES SQUARE MOTORS, 6758 AV (43D 


WE'RE PAYING HIGH PRICES 
Late Models—All Mak« 


05-WJZ—John B. Kennedy, News 
:10-WABC—Bil! Costello, News 
6: 15-WEAF—Serenade to America 


rzin, Conducting 
J [W—War Diary—George Brooks 
5-WEAF—H. V. Kaltenborn, News 
WMCA—Dumbarton Oaks and the 


30-WQXR—The Mus 
4$-WMCA—Mus 
WHN—Sidney Waltor 


Scholar, 147 W 42d (cor Bway) 
1472 Bway (42d Room LO 


DIAMONDS—JEWELRY | 
PY Tickets—Gold, Silverware | 


wident Ti § 
EXCEPTIONAL CASH PRICES PAID 
& Son (Est 1887 


Nathan Herm 
400 ER 9-8828) 1940 


mn 
S62 5 Av (46tr Suite 
CASH ON SIGHT—Provident Tickets. 
Others. Diamonds. jewelry. LO 5-8370 a 
Responsible Buyers. 140 W 42 St, Rm 201./@Uty i 
EXCELLENT PRICES . TANOK EP a 
Gold, Jewelry, Gold Teeth - rn by 
230 Columbus Av (70th —_— — 
STERLING silver, flat & hollow, 


needed: high prices paid 


WOR—Ramona, Songs 
WJZ—Democratic Campaign 
Russell Davenport 
WABC—Why Row F for FDR—Doro- 
thy and T. ©. Thackrey 
WMCA—Movie Gossip 
WHN—Racing Resume 
WLIB—Little Classics 
6:25-WQXR—News Reports 
WLIB—News (Off at 6:30 
6:30-WOR-~News; Frank Singiser 
WJZ—Whose War: Sports Talk 
WABC—Republican Campaign Talk— 
Warren H. Atherton 
WMCA—Tropical Tunes 
WNYC—N. Y. War Fund 
Rene Le Rot, Flute 
WHN—William Lang 
WNEW—News: Recorded 
WQXR—Dinner Concert 
6: 40-WEAF—Sports—Bill Stern 
WJZ—Recorded Music 
6 45-WEAF—Lowell Thomas 
WOR-—Sports—Stan Lomax 
WJZ—Henry J. Taylor, News 
WABC—The World Today 
WMCA—String Musi 
WNYC—News Report 
WHN—Donald Nelson 
6:55-WABC—Joseph C. Harsch 
WMCA—Lou Holtz, Stories 
7:00-WEAF—Johnny Mercer Show 
WOR—Fulton Lewis Jr.. News 
WJZ—Republican Campaign Talk— 
H. Alexander Smith 
WABC—I Love a Mystery 
WMCA—N. Y. Times News 
WNYC—Masterwork Hour 
WHN—G. H. Combs Jr.. News 
WQXR—Lisa Sergio, News 
7:03-WMCA—Raymond Scott Records 
7:15-WEAF—News—Robert McCormick 
WOR—The Answer Man 
WJZ—Socialist Campaign Talk~ 
Norman Thomas 
WABC—Baro1 Orchestra, Johnnie 
Johnston, Monica Lewis, Songs 
WMCA—Five-Star Final 
WHN—Sports—Bert Lee 
WQXR—Operetta Scrapbook 
7:25-WQXR—News Reports 


WEVD—Meliod ems 
30-WQXR—News Reports 
00-WEAF—News—Lyle Van 

WOR—Campaig: Talks—Vice Pres 

dent Henry Wallace. Secretary 
the Intertor f qi Ickes 

WJZ—News rts 

WMCA—N mes News 

WABC—News—John 

WHN—Rad! 

W NEW—Darc 

WEVD—News Reports 

WQXR—Just Music 
06-WMCA—Hariem Amat 
10-WABC—Major George 

Comments 
15-WEAF—An ndent 

Judge George Frankent! 

Matthew M. Levy. Leo J 

WJIZ—Pis ngers 

WABC—Joan Brooks 

WEVD—Around Town— 
:20-WJZ—ALP Cam paign 

King 
:30-WEAF—Arth 
Play—Be 
Aline Ma 
Haroid Verm 
WJZ—Dance 
WABC—Concert 
Herrmann 


1935 OLDSMOBILE 4-Dr Sedan 
1940 STUDEBAKER Champion Coupe 
ALL BELOW CEILING PRICES 


EDWARD MORGAN 
STH & BWAY CIRCLE 7-445: 
LINCOLN- -ZEPHYR 


coupe 


Judge George Frankenthaler 
Matthew M. Levy, Attorney 


County Chairman, Liberal Party 


Leo J. Rosett, Attorney 


York ¢ ty Chairman, Liberal Party 


Liberal Voter—Darian Fry, Edward/ j9. 
C. Lindeman il: 
WHN—Bob Howard. Piano 
WNEW—As a Matter of Fact 
8:00-WEAF—Mr. and Mrs. North 
WOR—Cecil Brown. News 
WJZ—News Comments 
WABC—Jack Carson Show 
WMCA—N. Y. Times News 
WNYC—Alr Warden Program 
WHN—Vineyard Melodies 
WNEW—Recorded Music 
WEVD—News in Yiddish 
WQXR—News Reports 
8: 03-WMCA y Lawrence, Records 
8:05-WQXR-—Symphony Hall: Haydn's 
Symphony No. 99 in E Flat 
8:15-WOR—Democratic Campaign Talk— 
Dorothy Thompson 
WJZ—Lum and Abner 
WNYC—Every Forty Seconds—Fred 
Loase 
WEVD—Jewish Philosopher 1 
WNEW-—Soldier Interviews 
8:30-WEAF—Henny Youngman. Comedy: /1) 
Carol Bruce, Songs: Eddy Howard 
Orchestra 
WOR—Stop That Villain—Quig 
WJZ—My Best Girls—Drama 
WABC—Dr. Christian—Sketch, With 
Jean Hersholt; Others 
WNYC—Lola Hayes, Soprano 
WHN—Bunkhouse Jamboree 
WNEW—News;: Popular Music 
WEVD—Melodic Gems 
YC—News Reports 
WEVD—News Reports 
8:55-WABC—Bill Henry, News 
} 9:00.WEAF—Democratic Round Table 
So What?—John Gunther 
Welles, Quentin Reynolds 
WOR—Gabriel Heatter, News 
WJZ—Joseph Dunninger, Mentalist ms 
WABC—Frank Sinatra, Eileen Bar-|!2 
ton, Songs: Charlies Boyer. Guest 
WMCA—N. Y. Times News 
WNYC—Keeping the Record Straight 
Carl Sherman; Capt. Grant Rey- 
nolds 
WHN—William S. Gailmor, News 
WNEW—Vineyard Melodies 
WEVD—Morris Paris, Comments 
WQXR—World-Wide News 
| 9:03-WMCA—Recorded Music 
715-WOR, WHN—Screen Test 
WMCA-~—Issues of the Campaign— 
William J. Goodwin 
WEVD—From Aachen, Germany; 
First Jewish Broadcast From 
Allied Liberated Nazi Soil 
(Record 
WQXR—Musical Memory Game 
9:30-WEAF, WOR—Governor Thomas E. | 
Dewey, Speaking from Bostor 
WJZ—Spotlight Band; Lionel Hamp- 
ton Orchestra 
WABC—Qulz—Which Is Which? 
With Ken Murray 
WMCA—Democratic Campaign Talk— 
Dorothy Thompson 
WNYC—Liberal Party Night: Prof 
George S. Counts, Ben Davidson 
WHN—Bible Auditorium 
WNEW—News; Variety Music 
WEVD—Freedom Forum: A Voice 
from Nazi Soil—Rev. William C 
Kernan, Dorothy Norman 
WQXR—Music Festival 
9: 45-WNEW—Soldiers With Coupons 
9:55-WJZ—Short Short Story 
WABC—Democratic Campaign Talk— 
Sinclair Lewis 
WNYC—News (Off at 10 
WQXR—News Reports 
10:00-WEAF—College of Musical 
edge, With Kay Kyser, Others 
WOR—Sumner Welles, Comments 
WJZ—Campaign Talk—Senator Harry 


Truman 
WABC—Great Moments tn Music 
Natalie Bodanya, Soprano; Morton 
Bowe, Tenor Suzanne Sten. So 
Lowenthal, Basso 
M E LO D { - 


" STUDEBAKE R—N. Y. 


co 


10 
Talk— 


MS IN¢ 
co 


YOUR CAR TO. 
ie A COD 


COLUMBUS 
Jacod & Co, 1739 Bway it 


| 
4| 
ei 

U 8-5393. SEE CHRYSLER 
| If you want 


au or Sell a Good ‘a 
\ PLYMOUTH SEDAN. R & H , 
J. Sloves 149 Canal St. WA_5-0666 NASH AMBASSADOR SD, R & SLER. N. 7. 


FREE Appraisal Diamonds, Jeweiry; tems BRIDCE 2336 Grand vee meted 1757 Broadway (57 St 2400 


srranged. Modell's. 67 Nassau St “ iat | 
_ oreur"m ae 183d & 184 Sts Bronx 1 

Electric Appliance Wanted HONE RAymond 9-3100 oe _|PAC KARD— NEW Y ORK: 
Ei ECTRIC ironer & washing machine; PONT CUST 4-DR SED, RADIO - Pn gene | ot Se 7 
f é 7 Oo } 


pay ¢ E automatic AF DODGE CUSTOM 4-DR SED, R 
“4 ~ 20D EN DR SE LATE MODELS—ALL MAKES 


tplate | iron & ‘“Universa washing|'41 ZEPHYR 4-DOOR SEDAN, R ICALL. COL U MBUS * 3900) 


ater in satisfactory 1 PACKARD CONV CLUB COU PE 
WE PAY 


renters | BRIDGE MOTORS 
on ‘ Av (169-170 Sts). Bronx. JE 7-6600}CASH FOR CARS 
LAS ILLELAC .| 


washing ma bicycles, small radios 

ns. broiler tums: bought, sold 
DIVISION OF GENERAL ae yee 
30 Bway at 55th St 7-6500 


ver Elect, 287 Av (26tt PE 6-445 o| Cadillac Special Imperial 
prigh y ey water coolers, AC or DC.| “la ctu nT hg! pe mil * 8.57 
350 CARS WANTED 
WILL PAY TOP PRICE 
Tel. Day-Night MAin 2-2440 wale 


mute Ultim tran port 
Bklyn Auto Sales, 354 Flatbush Av f 
8: "30 | 
. % 
ws 


Housefurnishings Wanted tion | Mc (ownel § Old Mil 
LIBERAL CASH IMMEDIATELY sreat Ne 
SELL YOUR CAR TO 
JENNINGS (Ford Dealer) 
STATION 
| WEAF 


48) R, 


one 


Wed. 
Nov. 1 
WEAF 


11:15 P.M, . 
“AN INDEPENDENT 


JUDICIARY”’ 


COR 
Dace? 


SEL L 
con 

green, greet 
heater, heavy 
mmaculat 
ROBER" 

993 Mad 


6-passenger 

ight 
ndio & 
ra 


tery Neu 0 


whitewall (¢ 
Vlad ret ing 
11 
ll: 


ll: 


eur Night 


urgently| il DODGE SEDAN, R 
Program "eens Fielding Eliot, 
Inder Judictary— 


News 


Music aler. Judge 


Rosett 


(Clip this for | 


Your Radio nar 3 
~ frais 8 ROOSEVELT 


Program ) tery TRUMAN 


| Keeping an ear on official 
A P andI.N.S.warnews.. 


Minute service 


bet 


41 Sones 
‘1 & i Joli 
Tal kJ 


-l2 


Every few minutes on 1430. 


ELECTRIC stoves 
lyea 


Je; 
hestra 


(Record) 
News 


nes ome 


; --RALEIGH H cigarettes = 


always on the 

fo8, 4 all day. 

ie y 12:00-woR- aon M 
WJZ—News: Variety Show 
WABC—News: Chicago M 
WMCA—News 
WHN—Music 
WNEW 





“TUNE IN 
TO-NIGHT 


Drama Re 
Read By 
s Matinee 
¢ Hour 
WQXR- Ne 12-0 
:30-WEAF—Donce Orchestra 
WJZ—Fiortto Orchestr 
WABC—James 
WwMCAa— We H 


Bkiyn 


,, BE SURE TO GET OBR OFFER | BUICK, 1940, 4-door sedan; radio & heater; 
recently 
SE 3-3000 


purchase < 5 indl- : 
’ ten “ 1” - a ~ — a = — perfect condition. Manhattan Motor Sales 
y— a Pg ~n ag _ |1900 Bawy (634). EN 2-9730 
‘599| 
—- 545 East Fordham Road. 


and nishings, Silver, China 
vtings, Oriental Rugs, Books, Vaiuable| BUICK ‘40 Sport coupe, special equipped. 
1902 Bway. EN 2-8685 
'WE NEED YO 


ions SAVO Y GALLERIES Con-Field Motors 
— Plea Se CHEVROLET 1935 sedan, motor 
OR 4-1532 
G. M. T MOTORS co 
__ First Av-90th-91st Sts. Closed Suns 


© ASH IM ‘MEDIATELY 3 ywerhauled: $150 
Top Cash Prices Paid For 


We Buy Complete Apts DODGE 1942 custom town 4-door, —= 
separate piece Singer sewing machines, drive, fully equipped, like new: prior! 
ators ue rugs, silverware,|certificate required Murray Motors, 
n radios, immediately.} Concourse. ME 5-7610 
Local and out of city or State cars 
Call or write collect. Immediate action 
No delay. CIRCLE 5-9454 
GENERAL USED CARS 


n, |\LINCOLN ZEPHYR 1941 convertible club 
MO 9-6 
56 St and 8 Av Open Sunday- ~evenings 


~oupe oe condition th rough +7 
ur Nh 0 1 Inco s wort 1 
DON'T SACRIFICE YOUR FURNITURE, | MYT@y Motors, 599 Concourse ME_>-7¢ 
Rugs, Silver, Bric-a-Brac. Bronzes, Pianos, 
TOP PRICE rOR YOUR CAR 
Plus allowance for radio and heater 


"| LINCOLN, 1936, 7-passngr black limousine; | 
Antiques, Book wh itewall tires: perfect cond. Manhattan 
before getting 

CALL CIRCLE 7-4452 
EDWARD MORGAN 


: | Motor Sal 1900 Bway (63d). EN 2-9730. 
W. J. FISCHER 
Corner 56th & Bway 


| NASH 1941, Brougham; radio-heater, over- 
BRyant 9-9130. Evenings, TR 


. drive, 5 original tires, perfect cond ; 
Brooklyn Eves, SLocum 6-9650 vate party. Hornreich, 4034 Surf Av, Bk! yn 
“TOP CASH PRICES PAID |NASH; Lafarette, teder sete meee r Pat 
FOR ALL MAKES & MODELS 
MANHATTAN MOTOR SALES 


FLATTAU, 3 W 64. AL 4-5740/ PACKARD "40, "6", Model "110" Club 
y Gist 1900 Bway (cor 63d) EN 2-9730 
TEPPER, 107 W CO_5-8884 
i929 Ford ton 
141 t-door sedan | 


Bau nesiarad 1 5 ia hoes calloa| =Lalle ice crea n' “bodies UN 4-4250 | “ ANTE D: i ‘ *-door "sedan, speak on behalf of 
UNITED STATES SENATOR 


ty, with reket agitators, | __ “AUTOS WANTED Vrite, Bos Times, 217 7 Ay 


or 
refriger 





299 
IDL 


WABC—News 

WMCA—News 
1:50-WHN—News 
2:00-WOR—News 


HENNY 
YOUNGMAN 


* CAROL BRUCE 
* EDDY HOWARD 


and His Orchestra 
Broadcast over entire 
NBC Network from... 


RADIO CITY, NEW YORK 


Off at 
Music to 5:30) 
FM STATIONS 
(Dial Settings Megacyates 
Ww2XMN—i2.8 
00-11:00 P. M —Variety Muste 
WNYC—F M—i2.3 
M NYC Programs 
WOYN—44.7 
00—Concert Mus 
:30—Ha wallan 


570 KILOCYCLES 


Robert F. Wagner 


10:15 to 10:30 P.M. 


Under the Auspices of the 
NEW YORK STATE 
COUNCIL C. I. O. 


:00-10:00 P. 


Pe 


good tires. 


1937 sedan (small), 
7:30—Loretta Hickey, Soprane 
8:00—Symphony Concert 
9:00—Marguerite Ware 
9:30—Symphony of Song 
10:00—News; Music 
11:00—News Reports 


WEAF—FM—45.!1 
3:00-11:00 P. M.—NBC Programs 
wQxQ—is.9 
5:00-12:00 P. M.—Same as WQKRE 
WHNF—46.3 
2:00—Recorded Mus 
5:00—Music and Variety 
8: 30-9: 00—Concert Music 
WABC—FM 
4:45-11:15 P. M.—WAE 
WBRAM—47 1 
P. M.—Same as M 


WABF—47 5 
3:00—Chamber Must 
4:00—Concert Must 
§:00—Parties—Julia G 
5: 15—Beyond Vict 
5: 30—Pop Concert 
6: 10—Newa Re 
6: 46—Biports—Guy 
7;00—Moods a oy 
7:15—Talk—Lance ¢ 
7:4—fymphonic C 
9: 15-9: 30—News 

TELEVISION 

WABD—¢ nannel 
8:15 FP. M.—Fiim 
8:30—The Magic Carpet 
9:00—Treasuty bow 


TONIGHT! 


hear 


LEIF ERICSSON 


discover America in a 
delightful musical setting 


s 


prano 








POLITICAL ADVER TISEMENT 


TONIGHT WJZ 6:15—6:30 P.M. 
HEAR 


RUSSELL DAVENPORT 


Chairman independent Republican Committee of New York 


ture, Bric-a-Brac, Silver, Antiques, ipe; radio, heater. well kept: low 
STATION WAGONS» BUSES (‘TOP PRICES STILL PAID|-——— 
“TOP PRICES PAID—GET MY OFFER 


ntings, Oriental Rugs, China, Pianos./™Mileage, car in excellent mechanical con- 
7 L ATE STA. WAGONS ALL MAKES, ESPECIALLY CADILLACS 
Rug Pianos f 


es on m inish spotles uphol- 
ACTION AT ONCE! HIGH PRICES |@t!on: | gleaming | fintst ess ur 
WRITE. WIRE OR PHONE 
LLER. CO 5-9021 LATE 7-PASSENGER LIMOUSINES 


Brie-a-bre cogs Silver An-|Stery Manhattan Pontiac, 1842 Bway (60), 
furnishings, “> ~a-brac,| 100 Other Used Cars MU RPHY & HOLZER 


SU 7-1100 

tiques. Orient Pianos. Paintings 
furnishii |Garfield 2222, 901 Grand Av, Toledo, Ohio 
soneete & Gone Zl Dexta, Ist Av.-97 St. AT 9-2998|* i. olede Oh 


win tEG A RDEN 12 E 12 ST PACKARD 1937, super-pertect; 
Ce ee armnis FOR ESSENTIAL USE | 
nc cat ee tre. | ST ATION WAGONS CO, 


ST 9-597 Eves. SU 7-2274 Rauh, 219 E 148th 
ACL CASH PAID [IMMEDIATELY TT ri erfect ‘every detail: $475, Mahoney's 
Furniture, f irnishings Silver, , Bric-a- Garage Corp ‘WA 3-5277. appointment 
brac. Linens. Oriental Rugs, Jewelry. , = 
LAWNER, 8] UNIVERSITY PL 
PASS. CARS OF ANY DESCRIPTION 
‘Tt BR 9-34 4 Ph one Wisconsin 7-3571, or write 

cut glass, near steins, | LARGE SELEC7 TION LATE MODELS) aed - acealer Rm 925. 152 W 424. N ¥ 
bisque figures. Arkin. TR 2-9199 s 
COMPLETE homes, odd pieces bought 845 | Av. cor 47 St EL 3- 8845, SU N INDUSTRIES, INC. 
asl Ross. 41 W 47tl BR 9%-2696 


STUDEBAKER ‘40, Commander, 6-cyl, 4-dr 
GR 5-1618-9 Eves, FO 5-8890| sedan; overdrive: radio, heater: excep 
( PRICES PAID! JUST TRY Usi|tionally good tires; clean interior. East 
= , %..-- Carpets, Pianos, China Side Chevrolet, Ist Av, 61st St. RE 4-4500 
Silverware Paint s Antiqu ies Estate 
| ‘ . . 
TRUCKS . any Ext co 5 
Machinery and Tools Wanted , Og eg ge ee ge TOP cash prices, all makes, 1936-42; will! 
BIPSAW 16” biade, 5 hp motor phase,| tract: _ Phone ES 008 | ca I Koeppel. Inc Chrysler dealer.| 
send ticula PO Box E.\Fwo trucks with 966.|262-19 Hillside Av. Jamaica. RE 9-3400 


POLITICAL ADVERTISEMENT 


WE buy inraltare, 
ant ques 


Knowl- 


NORMAN | Tune In 


homas 
ONIGHT! 


HF WJZ 


an a prices ,~ 

5-11 
for 
where wo 


win 


| WMCA 
Studio Muste 
Reeorded Muate 
WEVD-—Sara Sokolaky-Freid, 
WQXR-—Musical Milestones 
10:03-WMCA-—Recorded Music 
10:15-WOR--Talk-—David Kiaussner 
WMCA—Campatgn Talk—Senator 
Robert F. Wagner 
WEVD—Forum: Roosevelt 
Thomas—Prof. William 
Dr. Alfred P. Haake; 


WIN 
VNEW 





618 
Piano 
snara 


meer 


prano Fugene 
Robert Weede, Baritone 
Conductor 
WHN 1050 8:00 PM 
WINS 1010 8:00 PM 


Sodero 
N. ¥. Times News 
d particulars, DIA7A Times ROLES ROYCE CARS WANTED | ™ TRUCKS WANTED 
WNEW 1130 9:00 PM 
’ 


cross cut saw, 16° blade, 5 hp motor KR. Best (Dealer), 2 W 50th. PL 3-1740 
> , ’ . . itt " ° 
hase, 220 Volt, send particulars. P O CARS WANTED—CASH WAITING Send partisulais to FO Bee i 
Box E. Bast Rockaway, 1 1 MIDTOWN, 1875 Bway CO 5-9831) Rockaway, L 1 
CONVEYORS, PORTARLE [eer ATE party wants Ford cony.| 
AUTO STORAGE 


Wanted. TR 5-3608 | Av, Bklyn ! 
power presses baking oven.|/PRIVATE party wants to buy car in good WILLIAM STORAGE—$4 Month. 
789 10 Av (54th). CO 5-3024 or UN 4-327 


nly X27 46 condtion. Phone DI 6-2822 


. I ¢ an 


Ont 





ly | ELECTRIC 


capacity 


Fast 
‘ 


*36-'37 —— 
Dewey or 
Withers, 


Rev 


‘ WANTED 


Prin 


A 
Times 


Dr. 


ipals 





40 L 


ROOSEVELT NEEDED, 
SAYS JESSE JONES 


He Asserts President Should 
Be Kept, After Winning War, 
to Establish World Peace 


WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—The 
best interests of the United States 
and of the world call for 
ance of President in of- 
fice. of 
Commerce, head of the Reconstruc- 


continu- 
Roosevelt 
Secretary 


Jesse Jones, 


Finance and 
other 
argued 


tion Corporation 


many Government enter- 
prises, 
tonight 
President Roosevelt 
asserted, led this of 
the worst depression his- 
tory, is leading us to victory in this 
war, and will be needed 
lish a lasting peace 
Looking the 
Jones recalled _ that 
Roosevelt had said that 
over business would be released at 


in a radio address 


Mr 
country 


Jones 
out 
in our 
to estab- 


future, Mr. 
President 
controls 


into 


the earliest possible moment 
“President 
Jones 


Roosevelt 


said “knows that 
through private 


people be 


of their 


enterprise 
the line 


wants Gov 


to work 
g He 


wal 


free in 
choosi! 
plants con- 


by 
as 


ernment-owned 
verted to 
private enterprise 
possible when they 
needed for war work 

“He knows that 
not be able to buy all the plants 
immediately. Where not sold, he 
wants them leased that they 
can be converted to domestic pro- 
duction with the least possible in- 
terruption of employment He 
does not want them disposed of in 
a way that will create monopoly. 


domestic production 


as 


quickly 
are no longer 


industry will 


so 


“Heip for Free Enterprise” 


“There will always be 
ritations, between a few in busi- 
ness and branch of govern- 
ment. The Government represents 
all of the people and cannot ignore 
infringement ,of the law, even 
where unintentional. Government 
must be the umpire. We all know 
that We like the umpire when 
he decides in our favor, but we do 
not like him much when he 
has to decide against us 

“Having worl d_ closely 


some ir- 


some 


80 


with 


the President in matters affecting! 


economy for almost twelve 
years, I think I understand his 
views very, very well. He knows 
the importance of Government co- 
operating with business and help 
ing business where necessary. He 
knows that it is business and in- 
dustry in their many phases that 
provide employment, that give 
people work. 

“He knows that Government and 
business are dependent upon each 
other in our country—in our kind 
of government. That is why we 
a free and independent people, are 
winning the war, and that is why 
we will win and maintain the 
peace.” 

Secretary Jones said that one of 
the greatest accomplishments of 
the Roosevelt Administration has 
béen keeping the brakes on the 
tost of living during the war by 
controlling prices 

“Those of us who remember 
how prices skyrocketed in the last 
war can see what a good job has 
been done in keeping down the 
prices of food and rent and other 
necessities,” he said 

“No one understands American 
business better than the President 
In all my years of association with 
him, I have never made a sugges- 
tion for the benefit of any segment 
of our business economy that he} 
jid not readily approve. Time and | 
time again he has made helpful} 
suggestions to me for the benefit 
of business.” 


FEDERATION OPENS 
FUND DRIVE TODAY 


The 1944 campaign of the New 
York Federation of Jewish Philan- 
with 
seeking 
and 


our 


thropies_ will today 
8,000 volunteer workers 
funds for the 116 
social welfare agencies served by 
the federation. 

Samuel Schneierson, 
disclosed that the campaign 
seeking to raise funds for the cur- 
rent year and additional 
amount for expected post-war wel- 
fare problems 

Explaining this twin 
the campaign, which 
ty-seventh annual 
Schneierson declared 

“The time for post-war prepared- 
ness now, while we have the 
opportunity, and not when the 
problems families, returning 
war workers, youth delinquency 
and returning veterans will be 
upon us in flood tide. 

“This campaign represents 
act of faith. It rests on our con- 
viction that our citizens have the 
foresight and courage to build to- 
day in terms of a better commu- 
nity tomorrow.” | 

Federation headquarters said| 
pre-campaign meetings indicated 
that donations this year would ex-| 
ceed those of past years. 


open 
hospitals 
chairman, 
is 


an 


phase of 
the twen- 
appeal, Mr 


1s 


is 


of 


an 


EX] 


Miss Connors Predicts Election by 5,000; NEW TAX CODE PUT 


THE NEW YORK TIMES, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1944. 


Asks Mrs. Luce Some Questions in Telegram |jp TQ) HOUSE GROUP 


Margaret E 


port 


Bridge 


Democratic 


Connors 
id 


Boothe Luce in 


lawyer ar op 


the 


Connecti 


ponent of Clare 


Congressional race in 


strict predic ted she 
by 
lewed yesterday 


head- 


ut's Fourth d 


] TT } 
vould iW ne 


election » 000 
voles 


at the 
quarters in the Hotel Biltmore 


when inter 


National Democratic 
Miss Connors made public a tele- 
to Mrs in which 
for spe- 


gram sent Luce, 
answer 

Miss Connors 
Mrs 


repudiates the Re 


an 
First, 
whether 


she asked on 


cific issues 
wants to know Luce 
stands upon or 
publican party's, foreign policy 
record 

She also expressed curiosity as 
to the reason for Mrs. Luce being 
absent from the on the 
“GI Ballot” bill; thinks 
about the Republican plank prom- 
ising to 
control and other 
ers; what agricultural program she 
has in mind; what she proposes as 
alternative to the Home Own- 


which 


roli call 
what she 


rationing, 
emergency pow- 


an end price 


an 


ers Loan Corporation, she 
in view of her 
going 
House 

distinction 


and 


and 
Republicans 
White 


wants 


voted against 
remarks about 
into a whiter 
whether ahve 


drawn between native foreign 
Americans 
could not be 


Miss Connors’ tele- 


porn 
Mrs 


for comment 


KLAN STORY DENIED 


Luce reacned 


on 


ested in problems of taxation 
committee 
Nov. 14 drafting its own post-war 
tax plan based on the various pro- 
posals submitted to it 

The proposals of the American 
Taxpayers 
veyed to Representative Reed in a) 
letter 
president and secretary of the as- 
sociation 

Following 
down 
ber fetter 


proposals into contemplated 


Margaret Kk. Connors 
rhe New ¥ k Times Stud 


ottice 


g! Her Greenwich 
ported she was 


am re- 


“out campaigning.” 


BIDDLE TEST ASKED 


BY TRUMAN AGAIN ON A CIO PAMPHLET 


The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People re- 
leased a telegram yesterday from 
Senator Harry S. Truman in which 
he again denied that he ever had 
been a member of the Ku Klux 
Klan 

said he had 
Hal Styles, 
Democratic candidate for Congress 
in the Fifteenth District of 
fornia, who had been charged with 


In his message, he 


offered support to 


Cali- 


Klan membership, because he was 
to 


coming 


“reluctant believe partisan 


charges from Republican 
nomi- 


of 


quarters that a Democratic 


nee is a Klansman in view my 


own experience 

Pointing to his voting record in 
Congress, Mr. Truman also denied 
that “the 


he had. ever said he was 


son of an unreconstructed rebel 


’ a phrase which led Gov- 
ernor Sparks of to 
his nomination for vice president 


mother 


Alabama hail 


as “a victory” for the South 

The Truman message, coming in 
answer to an inquiry from the 
NCAAP, was released as Mr. Tru- 
arrived in New York to ad- 
the Liberal party rally at 
Madison Square Garden 

At a press interview at Demo- 
cratic National Headquarters in 
the Hotel Biltmore he forecast an 
overwhelming victory for Presi- 
dent Roosevelt. He repeated this 
prophecy later at a reception in 
the Hotel Astor tendered to him 
by the Independent Committee 
of the Arts and Sciences for 
Roosevelt, adding that he knew 
“the corpse of isolationism would 
be lowered into its grave Nov. 7.’ 
Mr. Truman also visited City Hall 
where Mayor La Guardia intro- 
duced him as “the next Vice 
President.” 


ROOSEVELT ADDS 
BROADCAST SPEECH 


Continued From Page 1 


man 


dress 


much of this afternoon and eve- 
ning to work on the speech. 

On the way to Boston, Mr 
Roosevelt will include Connecticut 
in his campaign itinerary. Tenta- 
tive plans provide that he to 
speak from the rear platform of his 
car at Bridgeport at about 10 A. M 
Saturday and move on to Hart- 
ford, arriving about noon. If the 
weather is good, Mr. Early said, 
the President may leave his train, 
motor to a bandstand in a Hart- 
ford park and speak extemporane- 


18 


/ously. 


Plans call for a drive to Spring- 
field, Mass., where another infor- 
mal talk is scheduled for about 2 
P. M., after which the President 
will return to his train 

The Boston address, which will 
be broadcast over the Blue, NBC 
and CBS networks, is scheduled to 
begin at 9 P. M The President is 
expected to speak from Boston's 
Fenway Park 

At his press 


conference todav 


ADVERTISEMENT 


Acid Indigestion 


Relieved in 5 minutes or 
double your money back 


excess acid causes painf 
¢ gas, sour macl eartburt 
prescribe the 
t tomati 


ans Tablets 


CO CIT 


and Monterrey 


American Airlines provides swift, daily service to 
these important Mexican cities. Ticket Office: Rocke- 


feller Center at 18 West 49th St.; 
Lobby Hotel New Yorker. 


42nd St. at Park Ave.; 


Airlines Terminal, 


Please make reservations well in advance. 
Phone HAvemeyer 6-5000 


AMERICAN AIRLINES %. 


ROUTE OF THE PLAGSHIPS 


lhis stake was 


| 


| 


Special to Tue New York 


WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—Tran- 
scripts of testimony in two 
heard today by a sub-com- 
mittee of the Senate Committee on 
Campaign Expenditures were or- 
dered sent to Attorney General 
siddle with a recommendation that 
a test case be brought against the 
Ohio council of the Congress of In- 
dustrial Organizations because of 
a pamphlet printed and distributed 
by the unit attacking Senator Taft! 
of Ohio as pro-Nazi and pro- 
Japanese 


MES 


cases 


recommendation was made 
as to 3,000,000 pamphlets printed 
and distributed by the Republican 
State Committee of Pennsylvania 
at a cost f $45,000, for which 
sponsorship had been attributed to 
the Trade Union News, a labor 
publication of Philadelphia. This} 
denounced Sidney Hillman primari- 
ly with the alleged communism 
of the former as the main theme 

President Jack Kroll of the Ohio 
CIO and John J. Abt, counsel for 
the PAC, maintained that the leaf-| 
let circulated against the re-elec- 
tion of Senator Taft was no more} 
a violation of the Corrupt. Prac-| 
tices Act than an editorial in a} 
newspaper. Senator Joseph H. Ball, 
Republican, of Minnesota, as chair- 
man of the subcommittee, admon- 
ished the witnesses that they were | 
“completely wrong” in such a com-| 
parison. 


No 


0 


Joseph B. Ely Out for Dewey 
Special to Tue New Yor« 
BOSTON, Oct. 31—Joseph B 
Ely, former Governor of Massa- 
chusetts, who quit the Democratic 
National Convention in 1940 after 
supporting the candidacy of James} 
A. Farley, came out tonight for 
the Dewey-Bricker ticket. “With 
me it the USA against the 
PAC,” said in a radio address 
of business 


IMES 


iS 


he 


Mr. Roosevelt disclosed, in response | 
to a question, that he had made a 
bet on the election in the course of 
one of his recent campaign trips. | 
He made it on a train, he said, and 


25 cents 

“Who'd you bet?” a correspond- 
ent asked. 

That, the President said with 
mock seriousness, was a very dan-| 
gerous question, and asked his’ in- 
terrogator if he knew what the an- 
swer was. The correspondent shook 
his head. The President cupped his 
hands to make the answer appear 
to be private and said through a 
laugh that it was none of his blank 
business. Asked whom he had bet 
on, Mr. Roosevelt gave the same} 
answer in the same way, but} 
brought out that the bet was at! 
ven money and concerned the elec- | 
tion result in a certain State. 

A correspondent, mindful of the 
law in New York State to discour- | 
age betting on elections, asked| 
whether his wager would disqualify| 
him from voting. No, Mr. Roose-| 
velt said, for his wager was made| 
outside the State of New York 


} 
| 


More Brilliant. Lasts Longer. 


Self-leveling. Only one Coat 
Needed. Flows on With Brush. 
A single coat of PLASTI-COTE 
is all you need. Produces a sur- 
face so smooth, so permanent. 

Cannot crack, peel nor chip. 


Ten Gorgeous Colors. 
LASTS FOR YEARS & YEARS 


For Exteriors—lInteriors 
Finishes Walls Like Tile. 


Woodwork Like Porcelain. 


PLASTI-COTE is 
Dries rapidly and 
and brilliant lustre. Easy to 
r Walls, Plaster, Old Wall 
Linoleum Woodwork Cabinets, 
Autos. Floors, Basements. Stucco 
Resists heat, water, Sun, Salt 
SI } 50 Gal 
PLASTI-COTE Waterproof Combination, 
1 gal. waterproof—1 gal. of Plasti-Cote 
Clear or Colors, both for only $8.75 
PLASTI-COTE Triple A transparent for 
wood floors and linoleums. 
$8.60 Gallon, $2.50 Quart 
Exterior PLASTI-COTE 
Waterproof—Saltproof $7.75 gal 


MAIL OR PHONE ORDERS WI 7 9364 
Visit N. Y. Office « See for Yourself 


CELLO-PLASTIC CHEMICAL CO. 


1328 Broadway, New York 1, N.Y. 
Bet. 24th and 35th Sts. Room 745 


brush marks, for 
mpletely self-leveling 
olds its color 


clean Pe 


Concrete 


ay, grease. 0 $7 


Association Urges Brief Substi- 
tute for ‘Present Complicated 
and Ambiguous’ Law 


By JOHN H. CRIDER 
Special t Tue New ore Times 

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—A pro-| 
gram for post-war taxation involv-| 
ing the subStitution of a new in- 
ternal revenue code of about 5,000 
words for “the present complicat-| 
ed and ambiguous” law was of-| 
fered today to the House Republi- 
can Post-war Tax Study Commit- 
tee by the American Taxpayers As 
sociation 

The plan was made 
tepresentative Daniel A. Reed 
New York, chairman of the com- 
mittee, who on Sept. 29 solicitated 
the views of various groups inter- 
The} 


by 


of 


public 


words. We feel, moreover, that a| 
signal opportunity to enact such a} 
law is afforded by the approach of | 
the post-war period which calls for 
a generous overhauling of the tax 
statutes rather than another long 
and amendment of 


ROOSEVELT SAYS — 
HE IS IN $1,000 CLUB 


He Tells of Proposing Plan and 


cumbersome 
law.” 
The association said further that 


it felt confident that a tax law of Suggesting at First That 
such as it proposed “would be such 


inducement to American enterprise the Fee Be $100,000 | 


to result, soon after the law's 
enactmentyin a yield of substan 
tially than $20,000,000,000: a 
year.” 

The association recommended 


existing 


Special to Tur New Yoru Times 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—-Presi- 
{' dent Roosevelt told his news con-| 
abolition of the present system Of) ference today that he suggested| 
double taxation of corporate in- the fo tion.of the One Thousand 
come distributed as dividends, said; ~~ sane — ne u 
that any such tax should be “a| Club, which Governor Dewey de-| 
manufacturer’s sales tax” and|nounced in Chicago Wednesday| 


urged “a lower levy on capital) night, and that, much to his sur-| 


more 


= — a shorter yor ane prise, he had learned only a few| 
or y-term capital gains | 
for long-term capital gain |days ago that he was a member| 


HUNTER FOR ROOSEVELT |“. 


The club came into being this 

iS |way, Mr. Roosevelt said in re-| 

58% of the Students Eligible to | sponse to a question: | 
Vote Favor Re-election Back in the summer he sug-! 
Bae at a meeting with a group, | 


nue 
000,000 annually, of which it would 
raise from $10,000,000,000 to $11,- 
000,000,000 from individual! income 
taxes: $3,000,000,000 to $4,000,000,- 
000 from corporation income taxes; 
$500,000,000 to $1,000,000,000 from 
estate and gift taxes; 
000 
cise 
sumer goods, and not 
$500,000,000 from miscellaneous in- 
ternal revenve 
wrote: 

— 
tute 
Treasury and the taxpayers could 
be written 


Hunter College students favor| Which he did not identify, that) 
President Roosevelt for re-election,| there be started, to help finance 
according to the results of a poll| the campaign, a $100,000 club. His 
‘tabulated yesterday. Of the 12 per! Visitors only laughed, and he asked 
cent of the students qualified to| What they were laughing about. 


vote next Tuesday, 33.3 per cent| Cut Suggestion to $10,000 
They told him that surely he} 


said they would cast their ballots) 
for Governor Dewey, 58.3 per cent} : : a 
said they would vote for Mr. Roose- did not think he would ever get | 
ond @2 uer cant wand Gada anybody to donate that much and| 
. weil he suggested a $10,000 club 
At this they all laughed again 


and said certainly he did not think 
would donate that much 


plans to start about 


Association were con- 


from Daniel E. Casey, vice 
velt 
cided 
The other 88 per cent of the stu 
dent bodv showed 19.5 per cent } iy 
supporting Mr. Dewey, 78.1 per! eith x ’ 
cent for Mr. Roosevelt and 2.3 per ar Pay 
cent undecided $1.000 
To a question, “Do you favor ” , 
lowering the voting age to include might get that much. 
wane 9) af - 46 The President, in carrying the 
18-year-olds 66.5 per cent of the 2 : 
: ‘ ou account forward, said that he 
Hunter students answered in the tae: 
Peg y~ ; : ~.,|mever thought of it again until a 
negative, 29.5 per cent were for it} ~ Wee ; j 
: : man from Chicago came in the} 
and 4 per cent were undecided. 
}other day and handed him a cer- 
; ; |tificate, which probably cost one-! 
Heat Record Is Set in Chicago beer a cent. ; 
CHICAGO, Oct. 31 (/P)—Indian The President, in his surprise, 
summer rivaled the real thing to-|exclaimed, My Gosh! or something 
day when the mercury reading of|and asked what the certificate was 
78.6 degrees at 3:15 P. M. broke the/for. His caller explained. The Pres- 
all-time heat record for Oct. 31.\ident had qualified for member- 
The previous high was 78.4, set in|ship in the One Thousand Club 


1935. |through the $1,000 he had sent in 


specifications laid 
Reed in Septem 
the fit 
reve 
$20,000.,- 


Mr his 


by 


association its 


needs of roughly 


said, Well, let's 
club, and they 


have 
said 


a 
he 


he 


$3,000,000,- 
$4,000,000,000 from ex- 
limited to luxury con- 
more than 


to 
taxes 


taxes. Mr. Casey 


a substi- 
the 


is our belief that 


law safeguarding alike 


in not to exceed 5,000 


ON THE AIR! ‘The Listening Post” every Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday 


by Mary Roberts Rinehart 


HOSPITAL shirt is hardly 

the costume for the street 
or proposing to a girl. But 
that’s what young Mr. Nor- 
wood wore. The reasons for the 
costume and the lady’s answer 
make one of the gayest and 
most amusing stories by this 
famous American writer. 


For Hilanious Humor- 
READ THE POST 


TOMORROW’S NEW PRODUCTS 


As America returns to peacetime pursuits, in- 
dustry’s new products for better living will first bin 
be found on the advertising pages of the Post. FIST b TUR) 


Aochiuerd 


as his regular contribution to the 
Democratic party fund. The Pres- 
ident had forgotten about it. 

So that, Mr. Roosevelt stated, 
was all the story there was, and 
so he was a member, too 


Queried on Kefauver Letter 


Mr. Dewey charged that “for 
$1,000 laid on the line to finance 
the fourth term drive, this Admin 
istration boldly offers for 
‘special privilege, which includes 
“assisting in the formation of Ad 
ministration policies.” 

In the questioning at the news 
conference today concerning the 
club, the letter written by Repre- 
sentative Estes Kefauver of Ten- 
nessee, executive director of the 
club, was brought up. This letter, 
inviting membership, said that the 
suggestion for the club “came from 
the President himself" and that the 
President had said he would like to 
counsel and advise with members 
of the club through the rest of his 
term, if he were re-elected. 

The President was asked today 
what privileges his membership 
gave him. He replied, jocularly,| 
that he was going to ask about} 
that. Reminded that, according to} 
the Kefauver letter, it would let! 
him “go anywhere” in town, the| 
President declared that that was 
a good idea. 

“It also entitles you to see the! 
President,” a correspondent added. | 

The President countered that} 
he'd have to arrange an appoint- 
ment through Maj. Gen. Edwin 
M. Watson, USA, his military aide 


Sale 


Poll in Rio Favors Roosevelt 
By Wireless to Tan Ne Yorn Times 
RIO DE JANEIRO, Oct. 31 
Re-election of President Roosevelt 
is favored in a poll taken by the 
newspaper Globo. The poll covered 
students, newspaper men, chauf- 
feurs, two sculptors, salesmen 
merchants and a sailor in the 

United States Navy. 


POLITICAL ADVERTISEMENT 


REJECT BOSSISM ! 
VOTE ON THE LAST LINE THIS TIME 
| or FRANKENTHALER 


FOR SUPREME COURT ' 


CITY FUSION PARTY | 


a a 


morning at 


ESQUIRE'’S Own 
lies Brody now in a 
book for GOURMETS! 


Now you can get 

Brody's oriceless. private 
collection of epicurean re 
ipes, wheedied, pried ond chermed 
from famed hefs and epicures 
round the world informe ntorm 
ative wite ane 
own raconteur tokes you 
tronomic adventure 
dishes, fascinating food anecdotes 
all mingled with esoteric odds and 
ends to delight your polote 
choice bits such as Terrine of 
Court-bouvillon, Groce Moores re 
ipe for Veal with Brandy A beck 
to moke your mouth woter 


Ty } {; i) } 
LONGUE 
& $2.50 af off booksellers, or dicect from: 


; GREENBERG: Publisher nvw v--s 


Pt. 
aS. 


Esquire » 
for @ gor 


IMONG huscro 


witty 


Game 


MAKES THE WORK 
MOVE FASTER! 


Executonel ndustrialMusic 
and Voice-Paging System 
enabie you to broadcast 
music, news, orders and 


announcements to your 
employees while they 
work hore 


Write, 
MU 6- 


EXECUTO 


415 lexington Avenue, New York 


FAST SERVICE / 
Phone ST. 9-5736 


FEDERAL LETTER CO, 35,7," 


New Yort. NY 


EUROPE and AFRICA 


VIA LISBON 
Sailings by passenger or freight steamers 


PORTUGUESE S. S$. LINES, Inc. 
$00 Fifth Avenue, PE. 6-1983 


10:45 E.W.T. on WJZ 


VG " 


Sniper Ship 


by John 


Bishop 


GREAT war story written aboard a 
destroyer shooting it out with a Jap 
land bastion on the seaway to Tokyo. The 
record of the gravest challenge naval 
gunnery has faced in all our Pacific offen- 
sive. First of two articles, thrillingly illus- 
trated with on-the-spot photography. 


For On-the-Spot War Nows- READ THE POST 


* * * 
ry, 4 s , 
didlcont Hlayavre 
by William Hazlett Upton 


LEXANDER BOTTS again gets things 
pretty much confused. But a cask of 


apple brandy and a 


trusty Earthworm 


tractor team up to change his Captain's 
bars toa Major’s gold leayes. It’s as wacky 
and wonderfulastory as you ever chuckled 


your way through. 


For a Cheerful Chuckle-R@£AD THE POST 


NF 


Post. 


5